ething of the kind
before, and he had, of course, scoffed at it. He only laughed now, and
forgot the hint at once.

Lebedeff really had been busy for some little while; but, as usual, his
plans had become too complex to succeed, through sheer excess of ardour.
When he came to the prince--the very day before the wedding--to confess
(for he always confessed to the persons against whom he intrigued,
especially when the plan failed), he informed our hero that he himself
was a born Talleyrand, but for some unknown reason had become simple
Lebedeff. He then proceeded to explain his whole game to the prince,
interesting the latter exceedingly.

According to Lebedeff's account, he had first tried what he could do
with General Epanchin. The latter informed him that he wished well to
the unfortunate young man, and would gladly do what he could to "save
him," but that he did not think it would be seemly for him to interfere
in this matter. Lizabetha Prokofievna would neither hear nor see him.
Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch only shrugged their shoulders, and
implied that it was no business of theirs. However, Lebedeff had not
lost heart, and went off to a clever lawyer,--a worthy and respectable
man, whom he knew well. This old gentleman informed him that the thing
was perfectly feasible if he could get hold of competent witnesses as
to Muishkin's mental incapacity. Then, with the assistance of a few
influential persons, he would soon see the matter arranged.

Lebedeff immediately procured the services of an old doctor, and carried
the latter away to Pavlofsk to see the prince, by way of viewing the
ground, as it were, and to give him (Lebedeff) counsel as to whether
the thing was to be done or not. The visit was not to be official, but
merely friendly.

Muishkin remembered the doctor's visit quite well. He remembered that
Lebedeff had said that he looked ill, and had better see a doctor; and
although the prince scouted the idea, Lebedeff had turned up almost
immediately with his old friend, explaining that they had just met at
the bedside of Hippolyte, who was very ill, and that the doctor had
something to tell the prince about the sick man.

The prince had, of course, at once received him, and had plunged into
a conversation about Hippolyte. He had given the doctor an account of
Hippolyte's attempted suicide; and had proceeded thereafter to talk of
his own malady,--of Switzerland, of Schneider, and so on; and so
deeply was the old man interested by the prince's conversation and his
description of Schneider's system, that he sat on for two hours.

Muishkin gave him excellent cigars to smoke, and Lebedeff, for his part,
regaled him with liqueurs, brought in by Vera, to whom the doctor--a
married man and the father of a family--addressed such compliments that
she was filled with indignation. They parted friends, and, after leaving
the prince, the doctor said to Lebedeff: "If all such people were put
under restraint, there would be no one left for keepers." Lebedeff then,
in tragic tones, told of the approaching marriage, whereupon the other
nodded his head and replied that, after all, marriages like that were
not so rare; that he had heard that the lady was very fascinating and of
extraordinary beauty, which was enough to explain the infatuation of a
wealthy man; that, further, thanks to the liberality of Totski and of
Rogojin, she possessed--so he had heard--not only money, but pearls,
diamonds, shawls, and furniture, and consequently she could not be
considered a bad match. In brief, it seemed to the doctor that the
prince's choice, far from being a sign of foolishness, denoted, on the
contrary, a shrewd, calculating, and practical mind. Lebedeff had been
much struck by this point of view, and he terminated his confession
by assuring the prince that he was ready, if need be, to shed his very
life's blood for him.

Hippolyte, too, was a source of some distraction to the prince at this
time; he would send for him at any and every hour of the day. They
lived,--Hippolyte and his mother and the children,--in a small house not
far off, and the little ones were happy, if only because they were able
to escape from the invalid into the garden. The prince had enough to do
in keeping the peace between the irritable Hippolyte and his mother, and
eventually the former became so malicious and sarcastic on the subject
of the approaching wedding, that Muishkin took offence at last, and
refused to continue his visits.

A couple of days later, however, Hippolyte's mother came with tears in
her eyes, and begged the prince to come back, "or HE would eat her up
bodily." She added that Hippolyte had a great secret to disclose. Of
course the prince went. There was no secret, however, unless we reckon
certain pantings and agitated glances around (probably all put on) as
the invalid begged his visitor to "beware of Rogojin."

"He is the sort of man," he continued, "who won't give up his object,
you know; he is not like you and me, prince--he belongs to quite a
different order of beings. If he sets his heart on a thing he won't be
afraid of anything--" and so on.

Hippolyte was very ill, and looked as though he could not long survive.
He was tearful at first, but grew more and more sarcastic and malicious
as the interview proceeded.

The prince questioned him in detail as to his hints about Rogojin. He
was anxious to seize upon some facts which might confirm Hippolyte's
vague warnings; but there were none; only Hippolyte's own private
impressions and feelings.

However, the invalid--to his immense satisfaction--ended by seriously
alarming the prince.

At first Muishkin had not cared to make any reply to his sundry
questions, and only smiled in response to Hippolyte's advice to "run for
his life--abroad, if necessary. There are Russian priests everywhere,
and one can get married all over the world."

But it was Hippolyte's last idea which upset him.

"What I am really alarmed about, though," he said, "is Aglaya Ivanovna.
Rogojin knows how you love her. Love for love. You took Nastasia
Philipovna from him. He will murder Aglaya Ivanovna; for though she is
not yours, of course, now, still such an act would pain you,--wouldn't
it?"

He had attained his end. The prince left the house beside himself with
terror.

These warnings about Rogojin were expressed on the day before the
wedding. That evening the prince saw Nastasia Philipovna for the last
time before they were to meet at the altar; but Nastasia was not in a
position to give him any comfort or consolation. On the contrary, she
only added to his mental perturbation as the evening went on. Up to this
time she had invariably done her best to cheer him--she was afraid of
his looking melancholy; she would try singing to him, and telling him
every sort of funny story or reminiscence that she could recall. The
prince nearly always pretended to be amused, whether he were so
actually or no; but often enough he laughed sincerely, delighted by the
brilliancy of her wit when she was carried away by her narrative, as she
very often was. Nastasia would be wild with joy to see the impression
she had made, and to hear his laugh of real amusement; and she would
remain the whole evening in a state of pride and happiness. But this
evening her melancholy and thoughtfulness grew with every hour.

The prince had told Evgenie Pavlovitch with perfect sincerity that he
loved Nastasia Philipovna with all his soul. In his love for her there
was the sort of tenderness one feels for a sick, unhappy child which
cannot be left alone. He never spoke of his feelings for Nastasia
to anyone, not even to herself. When they were together they never
discussed their "feelings," and there was nothing in their cheerful,
animated conversation which an outsider could not have heard. Daria
Alexeyevna, with whom Nastasia was staying, told afterwards how she had
been filled with joy and delight only to look at them, all this time.

Thanks to the manner in which he regarded Nastasia's mental and moral
condition, the prince was to some extent freed from other perplexities.
She was now quite different from the woman he had known three months
before. He was not astonished, for instance, to see her now so impatient
to marry him--she who formerly had wept with rage and hurled curses and
reproaches at him if he mentioned marriage! "It shows that she no longer
fears, as she did then, that she would make me unhappy by marrying me,"
he thought. And he felt sure that so sudden a change could not be a
natural one. This rapid growth of self-confidence could not be due only
to her hatred for Aglaya. To suppose that would be to suspect the depth
of her feelings. Nor could it arise from dread of the fate that awaited
her if she married Rogojin. These causes, indeed, as well as others,
might have played a part in it, but the true reason, Muishkin decided,
was the one he had long suspected--that the poor sick soul had come to
the end of its forces. Yet this was an explanation that did not procure
him any peace of mind. At times he seemed to be making violent efforts
to think of nothing, and one would have said that he looked on his
marriage as an unimportant formality, and on his future happiness as a
thing not worth considering. As to conversations such as the one held
with Evgenie Pavlovitch, he avoided them as far as possible, feeling
that there were certain objections to which he could make no answer.

The prince had observed that Nastasia knew well enough what Aglaya was
to him. He never spoke of it, but he had seen her face when she had
caught him starting off for the Epanchins' house on several occasions.
When the Epanchins left Pavlofsk, she had beamed with radiance and
happiness. Unsuspicious and unobservant as he was, he had feared at that
time that Nastasia might have some scheme in her mind for a scene or
scandal which would drive Aglaya out of Pavlofsk. She had encouraged
the rumours and excitement among the inhabitants of the place as to her
marriage with the prince, in order to annoy her rival; and, finding
it difficult to meet the Epanchins anywhere, she had, on one occasion,
taken him for a drive past their house. He did not observe what was
happening until they were almost passing the windows, when it was too
late to do anything. He said nothing, but for two days afterwards he was
ill.

Nastasia did not try that particular experiment again. A few days before
that fixed for the wedding, she grew grave and thoughtful. She always
ended by getting the better of her melancholy, and becoming merry and
cheerful again, but not quite so unaffectedly happy as she had been some
days earlier.

The prince redoubled his attentive study of her symptoms. It was a most
curious circumstance, in his opinion, that she never spoke of Rogojin.
But once, about five days before the wedding, when the prince was at
home, a messenger arrived begging him to come at once, as Nastasia
Philipovna was very ill.

He had found her in a condition approaching to absolute madness. She
screamed, and trembled, and cried out that Rogojin was hiding out there
in the garden--that she had seen him herself--and that he would murder
her in the night--that he would cut her throat. She was terribly
agitated all day. But it so happened that the prince called at
Hippolyte's house later on, and heard from his mother that she had been
in town all day, and had there received a visit from Rogojin, who had
made inquiries about Pavlofsk. On inquiry, it turned out that Rogojin
visited the old lady in town at almost the same moment when Nastasia
declared that she had seen him in the garden; so that the whole thing
turned out to be an illusion on her part. Nastasia immediately went
across to Hippolyte's to inquire more accurately, and returned immensely
relieved and comforted.

On the day before the wedding, the prince left Nastasia in a state of
great animation. Her wedding-dress and all sorts of finery had just
arrived from town. Muishkin had not imagined that she would be so
excited over it, but he praised everything, and his praise rendered her
doubly happy.

But Nastasia could not hide the cause of her intense interest in her
wedding splendour. She had heard of the indignation in the town, and
knew that some of the populace was getting up a sort of charivari with
music, that verses had been composed for the occasion, and that the
rest of Pavlofsk society more or less encouraged these preparations. So,
since attempts were being made to humiliate her, she wanted to hold her
head even higher than usual, and to overwhelm them all with the beauty
and taste of her toilette. "Let them shout and whistle, if they dare!"
Her eyes flashed at the thought. But, underneath this, she had another
motive, of which she did not speak. She thought that possibly Aglaya,
or at any rate someone sent by her, would be present incognito at
the ceremony, or in the crowd, and she wished to be prepared for this
eventuality.

The prince left her at eleven, full of these thoughts, and went home.
But it was not twelve o'clock when a messenger came to say that Nastasia
was very bad, and he must come at once.

On hurrying back he found his bride locked up in her own room and could
hear her hysterical cries and sobs. It was some time before she could be
made to hear that the prince had come, and then she opened the door only
just sufficiently to let him in, and immediately locked it behind him.
She then fell on her knees at his feet. (So at least Dana Alexeyevna
reported.)

"What am I doing? What am I doing to you?" she sobbed convulsively,
embracing his knees.

The prince was a whole hour soothing and comforting her, and left her,
at length, pacified and composed. He sent another messenger during the
night to inquire after her, and two more next morning. The last
brought back a message that Nastasia was surrounded by a whole army of
dressmakers and maids, and was as happy and as busy as such a beauty
should be on her wedding morning, and that there was not a vestige of
yesterday's agitation remaining. The message concluded with the
news that at the moment of the bearer's departure there was a great
confabulation in progress as to which diamonds were to be worn, and how.

This message entirely calmed the prince's mind.

The following report of the proceedings on the wedding day may be
depended upon, as coming from eye-witnesses.

The wedding was fixed for eight o'clock in the evening. Nastasia
Philipovna was ready at seven. From six o'clock groups of people began
to gather at Nastasia's house, at the prince's, and at the church door,
but more especially at the former place. The church began to fill at
seven.

Colia and Vera Lebedeff were very anxious on the prince's account, but
they were so busy over the arrangements for receiving the guests after
the wedding, that they had not much time for the indulgence of personal
feelings.

There were to be very few guests besides the best men and so on; only
Dana Alexeyevna, the Ptitsins, Gania, and the doctor. When the prince
asked Lebedeff why he had invited the doctor, who was almost a stranger,
Lebedeff replied:

"Why, he wears an 'order,' and it looks so well!"

This idea amused the prince.

Keller and Burdovsky looked wonderfully correct in their dress-coats and
white kid gloves, although Keller caused the bridegroom some alarm by
his undisguisedly hostile glances at the gathering crowd of sight-seers
outside.

At about half-past seven the prince started for the church in his
carriage.

We may remark here that he seemed anxious not to omit a single one of
the recognized customs and traditions observed at weddings. He wished
all to be done as openly as possible, and "in due order."

Arrived at the church, Muishkin, under Keller's guidance, passed
through the crowd of spectators, amid continuous whispering and excited
exclamations. The prince stayed near the altar, while Keller made off
once more to fetch the bride.

On reaching the gate of Daria Alexeyevna's house, Keller found a far
denser crowd than he had encountered at the prince's. The remarks and
exclamations of the spectators here were of so irritating a nature that
Keller was very near making them a speech on the impropriety of their
conduct, but was luckily caught by Burdovsky, in the act of turning to
address them, and hurried indoors.

Nastasia Philipovna was ready. She rose from her seat, looked into the
glass and remarked, as Keller told the tale afterwards, that she was "as
pale as a corpse." She then bent her head reverently, before the ikon in
the corner, and left the room.

A torrent of voices greeted her appearance at the front door. The crowd
whistled, clapped its hands, and laughed and shouted; but in a moment or
two isolated voices were distinguishable.

"What a beauty!" cried one.

"Well, she isn't the first in the world, nor the last," said another.

"Marriage covers everything," observed a third.

"I defy you to find another beauty like that," said a fourth.

"She's a real princess! I'd sell my soul for such a princess as that!"

Nastasia came out of the house looking as white as any handkerchief; but
her large dark eyes shone upon the vulgar crowd like blazing coals.
The spectators' cries were redoubled, and became more exultant and
triumphant every moment. The door of the carriage was open, and Keller
had given his hand to the bride to help her in, when suddenly with
a loud cry she rushed from him, straight into the surging crowd. Her
friends about her were stupefied with amazement; the crowd parted as she
rushed through it, and suddenly, at a distance of five or six yards
from the carriage, appeared Rogojin. It was his look that had caught her
eyes.

Nastasia rushed to him like a madwoman, and seized both his hands.

"Save me!" she cried. "Take me away, anywhere you like, quick!"

Rogojin seized her in his arms and almost carried her to the carriage.
Then, in a flash, he tore a hundred-rouble note out of his pocket and
held it to the coachman.

"To the station, quick! If you catch the train you shall have another.
Quick!"

He leaped into the carriage after Nastasia and banged the door. The
coachman did not hesitate a moment; he whipped up the horses, and they
were oft.

"One more second and I should have stopped him," said Keller,
afterwards. In fact, he and Burdovsky jumped into another carriage and
set off in pursuit; but it struck them as they drove along that it was
not much use trying to bring Nastasia back by force.

"Besides," said Burdovsky, "the prince would not like it, would he?" So
they gave up the pursuit.

Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna reached the station just in time for the
train. As he jumped out of the carriage and was almost on the point
of entering the train, Rogojin accosted a young girl standing on the
platform and wearing an old-fashioned, but respectable-looking, black
cloak and a silk handkerchief over her head.

"Take fifty roubles for your cloak?" he shouted, holding the money
out to the girl. Before the astonished young woman could collect her
scattered senses, he pushed the money into her hand, seized the mantle,
and threw it and the handkerchief over Nastasia's head and shoulders.
The latter's wedding-array would have attracted too much attention, and
it was not until some time later that the girl understood why her old
cloak and kerchief had been bought at such a price.

The news of what had happened reached the church with extraordinary
rapidity. When Keller arrived, a host of people whom he did not know
thronged around to ask him questions. There was much excited talking,
and shaking of heads, even some laughter; but no one left the church,
all being anxious to observe how the now celebrated bridegroom would
take the news. He grew very pale upon hearing it, but took it quite
quietly.

"I was afraid," he muttered, scarcely audibly, "but I hardly thought it
would come to this." Then after a short silence, he added: "However, in
her state, it is quite consistent with the natural order of things."

Even Keller admitted afterwards that this was "extraordinarily
philosophical" on the prince's part. He left the church quite calm, to
all appearances, as many witnesses were found to declare afterwards. He
seemed anxious to reach home and be left alone as quickly as possible;
but this was not to be. He was accompanied by nearly all the invited
guests, and besides this, the house was almost besieged by excited bands
of people, who insisted upon being allowed to enter the verandah. The
prince heard Keller and Lebedeff remonstrating and quarrelling with
these unknown individuals, and soon went out himself. He approached
the disturbers of his peace, requested courteously to be told what was
desired; then politely putting Lebedeff and Keller aside, he addressed
an old gentleman who was standing on the verandah steps at the head of
the band of would-be guests, and courteously requested him to honour him
with a visit. The old fellow was quite taken aback by this, but entered,
followed by a few more, who tried to appear at their ease. The rest
remained outside, and presently the whole crowd was censuring those who
had accepted the invitation. The prince offered seats to his strange
visitors, tea was served, and a general conversation sprang up.
Everything was done most decorously, to the considerable surprise of the
intruders. A few tentative attempts were made to turn the conversation
to the events of the day, and a few indiscreet questions were asked; but
Muishkin replied to everybody with such simplicity and good-humour, and
at the same time with so much dignity, and showed such confidence in the
good breeding of his guests, that the indiscreet talkers were quickly
silenced. By degrees the conversation became almost serious. One
gentleman suddenly exclaimed, with great vehemence: "Whatever happens,
I shall not sell my property; I shall wait. Enterprise is better than
money, and there, sir, you have my whole system of economy, if you
wish!" He addressed the prince, who warmly commended his sentiments,
though Lebedeff whispered in his ear that this gentleman, who talked so
much of his "property," had never had either house or home.

Nearly an hour passed thus, and when tea was over the visitors seemed to
think that it was time to go. As they went out, the doctor and the old
gentleman bade Muishkin a warm farewell, and all the rest took their
leave with hearty protestations of good-will, dropping remarks to the
effect that "it was no use worrying," and that "perhaps all would turn
out for the best," and so on. Some of the younger intruders would have
asked for champagne, but they were checked by the older ones. When all
had departed, Keller leaned over to Lebedeff, and said:

"With you and me there would have been a scene. We should have shouted
and fought, and called in the police. But he has simply made some new
friends--and such friends, too! I know them!"

Lebedeff, who was slightly intoxicated, answered with a sigh:

"Things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes.
I have applied those words to him before, but now I add that God has
preserved the babe himself from the abyss, He and all His saints."

At last, about half-past ten, the prince was left alone. His head ached.
Colia was the last to go, after having helped him to change his wedding
clothes. They parted on affectionate terms, and, without speaking of
what had happened, Colia promised to come very early the next day. He
said later that the prince had given no hint of his intentions when they
said good-bye, but had hidden them even from him. Soon there was hardly
anyone left in the house. Burdovsky had gone to see Hippolyte; Keller
and Lebedeff had wandered off together somewhere.

Only Vera Lebedeff remained hurriedly rearranging the furniture in
the rooms. As she left the verandah, she glanced at the prince. He was
seated at the table, with both elbows upon it, and his head resting
on his hands. She approached him, and touched his shoulder gently.
The prince started and looked at her in perplexity; he seemed to be
collecting his senses for a minute or so, before he could remember where
he was. As recollection dawned upon him, he became violently agitated.
All he did, however, was to ask Vera very earnestly to knock at his door
and awake him in time for the first train to Petersburg next morning.
Vera promised, and the prince entreated her not to tell anyone of his
intention. She promised this, too; and at last, when she had half-closed
the door, he called her back a third time, took her hands in his, kissed
them, then kissed her forehead, and in a rather peculiar manner said to
her, "Until tomorrow!"

Such was Vera's story afterwards.

She went away in great anxiety about him, but when she saw him in the
morning, he seemed to be quite himself again, greeted her with a smile,
and told her that he would very likely be back by the evening. It
appears that he did not consider it necessary to inform anyone excepting
Vera of his departure for town.

XI.

AN hour later he was in St. Petersburg, and by ten o'clock he had rung
the bell at Rogojin's.

He had gone to the front door, and was kept waiting a long while before
anyone came. At last the door of old Mrs. Rogojin's flat was opened, and
an aged servant appeared.

"Parfen Semionovitch is not at home," she announced from the doorway.
"Whom do you want?"

"Parfen Semionovitch."

"He is not in."

The old woman examined the prince from head to foot with great
curiosity.

"At all events tell me whether he slept at home last night, and whether
he came alone?"

The old woman continued to stare at him, but said nothing.

"Was not Nastasia Philipovna here with him, yesterday evening?"

"And, pray, who are you yourself?"

"Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin; he knows me well."

"He is not at home."

The woman lowered her eyes.

"And Nastasia Philipovna?"

"I know nothing about it."

"Stop a minute! When will he come back?"

"I don't know that either."

The door was shut with these words, and the old woman disappeared. The
prince decided to come back within an hour. Passing out of the house, he
met the porter.

"Is Parfen Semionovitch at home?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Why did they tell me he was not at home, then?" "Where did they tell
you so,--at his door?" "No, at his mother's flat; I rang at Parfen
Semionovitch's door and nobody came."

"Well, he may have gone out. I can't tell. Sometimes he takes the keys
with him, and leaves the rooms empty for two or three days."

"Do you know for certain that he was at home last night?"

"Yes, he was."

"Was Nastasia Philipovna with him?"

"I don't know; she doesn't come often. I think I should have known if
she had come."

The prince went out deep in thought, and walked up and down the pavement
for some time. The windows of all the rooms occupied by Rogojin were
closed, those of his mother's apartments were open. It was a hot, bright
day. The prince crossed the road in order to have a good look at the
windows again; not only were Rogojin's closed, but the white blinds were
all down as well.

He stood there for a minute and then, suddenly and strangely enough, it
seemed to him that a little corner of one of the blinds was lifted,
and Rogojin's face appeared for an instant and then vanished. He waited
another minute, and decided to go and ring the bell once more; however,
he thought better of it again and put it off for an hour.

The chief object in his mind at this moment was to get as quickly as
he could to Nastasia Philipovna's lodging. He remembered that, not long
since, when she had left Pavlofsk at his request, he had begged her
to put up in town at the house of a respectable widow, who had
well-furnished rooms to let, near the Ismailofsky barracks. Probably
Nastasia had kept the rooms when she came down to Pavlofsk this last
time; and most likely she would have spent the night in them, Rogojin
having taken her straight there from the station.

The prince took a droshky. It struck him as he drove on that he ought
to have begun by coming here, since it was most improbable that Rogojin
should have taken Nastasia to his own house last night. He remembered
that the porter said she very rarely came at all, so that it was still
less likely that she would have gone there so late at night.

Vainly trying to comfort himself with these reflections, the prince
reached the Ismailofsky barracks more dead than alive.

To his consternation the good people at the lodgings had not only heard
nothing of Nastasia, but all came out to look at him as if he were a
marvel of some sort. The whole family, of all ages, surrounded him, and
he was begged to enter. He guessed at once that they knew perfectly well
who he was, and that yesterday ought to have been his wedding-day; and
further that they were dying to ask about the wedding, and especially
about why he should be here now, inquiring for the woman who in all
reasonable human probability might have been expected to be with him in
Pavlofsk.

He satisfied their curiosity, in as few words as possible, with regard
to the wedding, but their exclamations and sighs were so numerous and
sincere that he was obliged to tell the whole story--in a short form,
of course. The advice of all these agitated ladies was that the prince
should go at once and knock at Rogojin's until he was let in: and when
let in insist upon a substantial explanation of everything. If Rogojin
was really not at home, the prince was advised to go to a certain house,
the address of which was given, where lived a German lady, a friend of
Nastasia Philipovna's. It was possible that she might have spent the
night there in her anxiety to conceal herself.

The prince rose from his seat in a condition of mental collapse. The
good ladies reported afterwards that "his pallor was terrible to see,
and his legs seemed to give way underneath him." With difficulty he was
made to understand that his new friends would be glad of his address, in
order to act with him if possible. After a moment's thought he gave the
address of the small hotel, on the stairs of which he had had a fit some
five weeks since. He then set off once more for Rogojin's.

This time they neither opened the door at Rogojin's flat nor at the one
opposite. The prince found the porter with difficulty, but when found,
the man would hardly look at him or answer his questions, pretending
to be busy. Eventually, however, he was persuaded to reply so far as to
state that Rogojin had left the house early in the morning and gone to
Pavlofsk, and that he would not return today at all.

"I shall wait; he may come back this evening."

"He may not be home for a week."

"Then, at all events, he DID sleep here, did he?"

"Well--he did sleep here, yes."

All this was suspicious and unsatisfactory. Very likely the porter had
received new instructions during the interval of the prince's absence;
his manner was so different now. He had been obliging--now he was as
obstinate and silent as a mule. However, the prince decided to call
again in a couple of hours, and after that to watch the house, in case
of need. His hope was that he might yet find Nastasia at the address
which he had just received. To that address he now set off at full
speed.

But alas! at the German lady's house they did not even appear to
understand what he wanted. After a while, by means of certain hints, he
was able to gather that Nastasia must have had a quarrel with her friend
two or three weeks ago, since which date the latter had neither heard
nor seen anything of her. He was given to understand that the subject of
Nastasia's present whereabouts was not of the slightest interest to her;
and that Nastasia might marry all the princes in the world for all she
cared! So Muishkin took his leave hurriedly. It struck him now that she
might have gone away to Moscow just as she had done the last time, and
that Rogojin had perhaps gone after her, or even WITH her. If only he
could find some trace!

However, he must take his room at the hotel; and he started off in that
direction. Having engaged his room, he was asked by the waiter whether
he would take dinner; replying mechanically in the affirmative, he sat
down and waited; but it was not long before it struck him that dining
would delay him. Enraged at this idea, he started up, crossed the
dark passage (which filled him with horrible impressions and gloomy
forebodings), and set out once more for Rogojin's. Rogojin had not
returned, and no one came to the door. He rang at the old lady's door
opposite, and was informed that Parfen Semionovitch would not return for
three days. The curiosity with which the old servant stared at him again
impressed the prince disagreeably. He could not find the porter this
time at all.

As before, he crossed the street and watched the windows from the other
side, walking up and down in anguish of soul for half an hour or so in
the stifling heat. Nothing stirred; the blinds were motionless; indeed,
the prince began to think that the apparition of Rogojin's face could
have been nothing but fancy. Soothed by this thought, he drove off once
more to his friends at the Ismailofsky barracks. He was expected
there. The mother had already been to three or four places to look for
Nastasia, but had not found a trace of any kind.

The prince said nothing, but entered the room, sat down silently, and
stared at them, one after the other, with the air of a man who cannot
understand what is being said to him. It was strange--one moment he
seemed to be so observant, the next so absent; his behaviour struck
all the family as most remarkable. At length he rose from his seat, and
begged to be shown Nastasia's rooms. The ladies reported afterwards how
he had examined everything in the apartments. He observed an open book
on the table, Madam Bovary, and requested the leave of the lady of the
house to take it with him. He had turned down the leaf at the open page,
and pocketed it before they could explain that it was a library book. He
had then seated himself by the open window, and seeing a card-table, he
asked who played cards.

He was informed that Nastasia used to play with Rogojin every evening,
either at "preference" or "little fool," or "whist"; that this had been
their practice since her last return from Pavlofsk; that she had taken
to this amusement because she did not like to see Rogojin sitting silent
and dull for whole evenings at a time; that the day after Nastasia had
made a remark to this effect, Rogojin had whipped a pack of cards out
of his pocket. Nastasia had laughed, but soon they began playing. The
prince asked where were the cards, but was told that Rogojin used to
bring a new pack every day, and always carried it away in his pocket.

The good ladies recommended the prince to try knocking at Rogojin's once
more--not at once, but in the evening Meanwhile, the mother would go to
Pavlofsk to inquire at Dana Alexeyevna's whether anything had been heard
of Nastasia there. The prince was to come back at ten o'clock and meet
her, to hear her news and arrange plans for the morrow.

In spite of the kindly-meant consolations of his new friends, the prince
walked to his hotel in inexpressible anguish of spirit, through the hot,
dusty streets, aimlessly staring at the faces of those who passed him.
Arrived at his destination, he determined to rest awhile in his room
before he started for Rogojin's once more. He sat down, rested his
elbows on the table and his head on his hands, and fell to thinking.

Heaven knows how long and upon what subjects he thought. He thought
of many things--of Vera Lebedeff, and of her father; of Hippolyte; of
Rogojin himself, first at the funeral, then as he had met him in the
park, then, suddenly, as they had met in this very passage, outside,
when Rogojin had watched in the darkness and awaited him with uplifted
knife. The prince remembered his enemy's eyes as they had glared at him
in the darkness. He shuddered, as a sudden idea struck him.

This idea was, that if Rogojin were in Petersburg, though he might hide
for a time, yet he was quite sure to come to him--the prince--before
long, with either good or evil intentions, but probably with the same
intention as on that other occasion. At all events, if Rogojin were to
come at all he would be sure to seek the prince here--he had no other
town address--perhaps in this same corridor; he might well seek him here
if he needed him. And perhaps he did need him. This idea seemed quite
natural to the prince, though he could not have explained why he should
so suddenly have become necessary to Rogojin. Rogojin would not come if
all were well with him, that was part of the thought; he would come if
all were not well; and certainly, undoubtedly, all would not be well
with him. The prince could not bear this new idea; he took his hat and
rushed out towards the street. It was almost dark in the passage.

"What if he were to come out of that corner as I go by and--and stop
me?" thought the prince, as he approached the familiar spot. But no one
came out.

He passed under the gateway and into the street. The crowds of people
walking about--as is always the case at sunset in Petersburg, during the
summer--surprised him, but he walked on in the direction of Rogojin's
house.

About fifty yards from the hotel, at the first cross-road, as he passed
through the crowd of foot-passengers sauntering along, someone touched
his shoulder, and said in a whisper into his ear:

"Lef Nicolaievitch, my friend, come along with me." It was Rogojin.

The prince immediately began to tell him, eagerly and joyfully, how he
had but the moment before expected to see him in the dark passage of the
hotel.

"I was there," said Rogojin, unexpectedly. "Come along." The prince was
surprised at this answer; but his astonishment increased a couple of
minutes afterwards, when he began to consider it. Having thought it
over, he glanced at Rogojin in alarm. The latter was striding along a
yard or so ahead, looking straight in front of him, and mechanically
making way for anyone he met.

"Why did you not ask for me at my room if you were in the hotel?" asked
the prince, suddenly.

Rogojin stopped and looked at him; then reflected, and replied as though
he had not heard the question:

"Look here, Lef Nicolaievitch, you go straight on to the house; I shall
walk on the other side. See that we keep together."

So saying, Rogojin crossed the road.

Arrived on the opposite pavement, he looked back to see whether the
prince were moving, waved his hand in the direction of the Gorohovaya,
and strode on, looking across every moment to see whether Muishkin
understood his instructions. The prince supposed that Rogojin desired to
look out for someone whom he was afraid to miss; but if so, why had he
not told HIM whom to look out for? So the two proceeded for half a mile
or so. Suddenly the prince began to tremble from some unknown cause. He
could not bear it, and signalled to Rogojin across the road.

The latter came at once.

"Is Nastasia Philipovna at your house?"

"Yes."

"And was it you looked out of the window under the blind this morning?"

"Yes."

"Then why did--"

But the prince could not finish his question; he did not know what to
say. Besides this, his heart was beating so that he found it difficult
to speak at all. Rogojin was silent also and looked at him as before,
with an expression of deep thoughtfulness.

"Well, I'm going," he said, at last, preparing to recross the road. "You
go along here as before; we will keep to different sides of the road;
it's better so, you'll see."

When they reached the Gorohovaya, and came near the house, the prince's
legs were trembling so that he could hardly walk. It was about ten
o'clock. The old lady's windows were open, as before; Rogojin's were
all shut, and in the darkness the white blinds showed whiter than ever.
Rogojin and the prince each approached the house on his respective side
of the road; Rogojin, who was on the near side, beckoned the prince
across. He went over to the doorway.

"Even the porter does not know that I have come home now. I told him,
and told them at my mother's too, that I was off to Pavlofsk," said
Rogojin, with a cunning and almost satisfied smile. "We'll go in quietly
and nobody will hear us."

He had the key in his hand. Mounting the staircase he turned and
signalled to the prince to go more softly; he opened the door very
quietly, let the prince in, followed him, locked the door behind him,
and put the key in his pocket.

"Come along," he whispered.

He had spoken in a whisper all the way. In spite of his apparent outward
composure, he was evidently in a state of great mental agitation.
Arrived in a large salon, next to the study, he went to the window and
cautiously beckoned the prince up to him.

"When you rang the bell this morning I thought it must be you. I went to
the door on tip-toe and heard you talking to the servant opposite. I had
told her before that if anyone came and rang--especially you, and I gave
her your name--she was not to tell about me. Then I thought, what if
he goes and stands opposite and looks up, or waits about to watch the
house? So I came to this very window, looked out, and there you were
staring straight at me. That's how it came about."

"Where is Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the prince, breathlessly.

"She's here," replied Rogojin, slowly, after a slight pause.

"Where?"

Rogojin raised his eyes and gazed intently at the prince.

"Come," he said.

He continued to speak in a whisper, very deliberately as before, and
looked strangely thoughtful and dreamy. Even while he told the story of
how he had peeped through the blind, he gave the impression of wishing
to say something else. They entered the study. In this room some changes
had taken place since the prince last saw it. It was now divided into
two equal parts by a heavy green silk curtain stretched across it,
separating the alcove beyond, where stood Rogojin's bed, from the rest
of the room.

The heavy curtain was drawn now, and it was very dark. The bright
Petersburg summer nights were already beginning to close in, and but for
the full moon, it would have been difficult to distinguish anything in
Rogojin's dismal room, with the drawn blinds. They could just see one
anothers faces, however, though not in detail. Rogojin's face was white,
as usual. His glittering eyes watched the prince with an intent stare.

"Had you not better light a candle?" said Muishkin.

"No, I needn't," replied Rogojin, and taking the other by the hand he
drew him down to a chair. He himself took a chair opposite and drew it
up so close that he almost pressed against the prince's knees. At their
side was a little round table.

"Sit down," said Rogojin; "let's rest a bit." There was silence for a
moment.

"I knew you would be at that hotel," he continued, just as men sometimes
commence a serious conversation by discussing any outside subject before
leading up to the main point. "As I entered the passage it struck me
that perhaps you were sitting and waiting for me, just as I was waiting
for you. Have you been to the old lady at Ismailofsky barracks?"

"Yes," said the prince, squeezing the word out with difficulty owing to
the dreadful beating of his heart.

"I thought you would. 'They'll talk about it,' I thought; so I
determined to go and fetch you to spend the night here--'We will be
together,' I thought, 'for this one night--'"

"Rogojin, WHERE is Nastasia Philipovna?" said the prince, suddenly
rising from his seat. He was quaking in all his limbs, and his words
came in a scarcely audible whisper. Rogojin rose also.

"There," he whispered, nodding his head towards the curtain.

"Asleep?" whispered the prince.

Rogojin looked intently at him again, as before.

"Let's go in--but you mustn't--well--let's go in."

He lifted the curtain, paused--and turned to the prince. "Go in," he
said, motioning him to pass behind the curtain. Muishkin went in.

"It's so dark," he said.

"You can see quite enough," muttered Rogojin.

"I can just see there's a bed--"

"Go nearer," suggested Rogojin, softly.

The prince took a step forward--then another--and paused. He stood and
stared for a minute or two.

Neither of the men spoke a word while at the bedside. The prince's heart
beat so loud that its knocking seemed to be distinctly audible in the
deathly silence.

But now his eyes had become so far accustomed to the darkness that he
could distinguish the whole of the bed. Someone was asleep upon
it--in an absolutely motionless sleep. Not the slightest movement was
perceptible, not the faintest breathing could be heard. The sleeper
was covered with a white sheet; the outline of the limbs was hardly
distinguishable. He could only just make out that a human being lay
outstretched there.

All around, on the bed, on a chair beside it, on the floor, were
scattered the different portions of a magnificent white silk dress, bits
of lace, ribbons and flowers. On a small table at the bedside glittered
a mass of diamonds, torn off and thrown down anyhow. From under a heap
of lace at the end of the bed peeped a small white foot, which looked as
though it had been chiselled out of marble; it was terribly still.

The prince gazed and gazed, and felt that the more he gazed the more
death-like became the silence. Suddenly a fly awoke somewhere, buzzed
across the room, and settled on the pillow. The prince shuddered.

"Let's go," said Rogojin, touching his shoulder. They left the alcove
and sat down in the two chairs they had occupied before, opposite to one
another. The prince trembled more and more violently, and never took his
questioning eyes off Rogojin's face.

"I see you are shuddering, Lef Nicolaievitch," said the latter, at
length, "almost as you did once in Moscow, before your fit; don't you
remember? I don't know what I shall do with you--"

The prince bent forward to listen, putting all the strain he could
muster upon his understanding in order to take in what Rogojin said, and
continuing to gaze at the latter's face.

"Was it you?" he muttered, at last, motioning with his head towards the
curtain.

"Yes, it was I," whispered Rogojin, looking down.

Neither spoke for five minutes.

"Because, you know," Rogojin recommenced, as though continuing a former
sentence, "if you were ill now, or had a fit, or screamed, or anything,
they might hear it in the yard, or even in the street, and guess that
someone was passing the night in the house. They would all come and
knock and want to come in, because they know I am not at home. I didn't
light a candle for the same reason. When I am not here--for two or
three days at a time, now and then--no one comes in to tidy the house
or anything; those are my orders. So that I want them to not know we are
spending the night here--"

"Wait," interrupted the prince. "I asked both the porter and the woman
whether Nastasia Philipovna had spent last night in the house; so they
knew--"

"I know you asked. I told them that she had called in for ten minutes,
and then gone straight back to Pavlofsk. No one knows she slept here.
Last night we came in just as carefully as you and I did today. I
thought as I came along with her that she would not like to creep in so
secretly, but I was quite wrong. She whispered, and walked on tip-toe;
she carried her skirt over her arm, so that it shouldn't rustle, and
she held up her finger at me on the stairs, so that I shouldn't make
a noise--it was you she was afraid of. She was mad with terror in the
train, and she begged me to bring her to this house. I thought of taking
her to her rooms at the Ismailofsky barracks first; but she wouldn't
hear of it. She said, 'No--not there; he'll find me out at once there.
Take me to your own house, where you can hide me, and tomorrow we'll set
off for Moscow.' Thence she would go to Orel, she said. When she went to
bed, she was still talking about going to Orel."

"Wait! What do you intend to do now, Parfen?"

"Well, I'm afraid of you. You shudder and tremble so. We'll pass the
night here together. There are no other beds besides that one; but I've
thought how we'll manage. I'll take the cushions off all the sofas, and
lay them down on the floor, up against the curtain here--for you and
me--so that we shall be together. For if they come in and look about
now, you know, they'll find her, and carry her away, and they'll be
asking me questions, and I shall say I did it, and then they'll take me
away, too, don't you see? So let her lie close to us--close to you and
me.

"Yes, yes," agreed the prince, warmly.

"So we will not say anything about it, or let them take her away?"

"Not for anything!" cried the other; "no, no, no!"

"So I had decided, my friend; not to give her up to anyone," continued
Rogojin. "We'll be very quiet. I have only been out of the house one
hour all day, all the rest of the time I have been with her. I dare say
the air is very bad here. It is so hot. Do you find it bad?"

"I don't know--perhaps--by morning it will be."

"I've covered her with oil-cloth--best American oilcloth, and put
the sheet over that, and four jars of disinfectant, on account of the
smell--as they did at Moscow--you remember? And she's lying so still;
you shall see, in the morning, when it's light. What! can't you get up?"
asked Rogojin, seeing the other was trembling so that he could not rise
from his seat.

"My legs won't move," said the prince; "it's fear, I know. When my fear
is over, I'll get up--"

"Wait a bit--I'll make the bed, and you can lie down. I'll lie down,
too, and we'll listen and watch, for I don't know yet what I shall do...
I tell you beforehand, so that you may be ready in case I--"

Muttering these disconnected words, Rogojin began to make up the beds.
It was clear that he had devised these beds long before; last night he
slept on the sofa. But there was no room for two on the sofa, and he
seemed anxious that he and the prince should be close to one another;
therefore, he now dragged cushions of all sizes and shapes from the
sofas, and made a sort of bed of them close by the curtain. He then
approached the prince, and gently helped him to rise, and led him
towards the bed. But the prince could now walk by himself, so that his
fear must have passed; for all that, however, he continued to shudder.

"It's hot weather, you see," continued Rogojin, as he lay down on the
cushions beside Muishkin, "and, naturally, there will be a smell. I
daren't open the window. My mother has some beautiful flowers in pots;
they have a delicious scent; I thought of fetching them in, but that old
servant will find out, she's very inquisitive.

"Yes, she is inquisitive," assented the prince.

"I thought of buying flowers, and putting them all round her; but I was
afraid it would make us sad to see her with flowers round her."

"Look here," said the prince; he was bewildered, and his brain wandered.
He seemed to be continually groping for the questions he wished to ask,
and then losing them. "Listen--tell me--how did you--with a knife?--That
same one?"

"Yes, that same one."

"Wait a minute, I want to ask you something else, Parfen; all sorts of
things; but tell me first, did you intend to kill her before my wedding,
at the church door, with your knife?"

"I don't know whether I did or not," said Rogojin, drily, seeming to be
a little astonished at the question, and not quite taking it in.

"Did you never take your knife to Pavlofsk with you?" "No. As to the
knife," he added, "this is all I can tell you about it." He was silent
for a moment, and then said, "I took it out of the locked drawer this
morning about three, for it was in the early morning all this--happened.
It has been inside the book ever since--and--and--this is what is such
a marvel to me, the knife only went in a couple of inches at most, just
under her left breast, and there wasn't more than half a tablespoonful
of blood altogether, not more."

"Yes--yes--yes--" The prince jumped up in extraordinary agitation.
"I know, I know, I've read of that sort of thing--it's internal
haemorrhage, you know. Sometimes there isn't a drop--if the blow goes
straight to the heart--"

"Wait--listen!" cried Rogojin, suddenly, starting up. "Somebody's
walking about, do you hear? In the hall." Both sat up to listen.

"I hear," said the prince in a whisper, his eyes fixed on Rogojin.

"Footsteps?"

"Yes."

"Shall we shut the door, and lock it, or not?"

"Yes, lock it."

They locked the door, and both lay down again. There was a long silence.

"Yes, by-the-by," whispered the prince, hurriedly and excitedly as
before, as though he had just seized hold of an idea and was afraid of
losing it again. "I--I wanted those cards! They say you played cards
with her?"

"Yes, I played with her," said Rogojin, after a short silence.

"Where are the cards?"

"Here they are," said Rogojin, after a still longer pause.

He pulled out a pack of cards, wrapped in a bit of paper, from his
pocket, and handed them to the prince. The latter took them, with a sort
of perplexity. A new, sad, helpless feeling weighed on his heart; he had
suddenly realized that not only at this moment, but for a long while,
he had not been saying what he wanted to say, had not been acting as he
wanted to act; and that these cards which he held in his hand, and which
he had been so delighted to have at first, were now of no use--no use...
He rose, and wrung his hands. Rogojin lay motionless, and seemed neither
to hear nor see his movements; but his eyes blazed in the darkness, and
were fixed in a wild stare.

The prince sat down on a chair, and watched him in alarm. Half an hour
went by.

Suddenly Rogojin burst into a loud abrupt laugh, as though he had quite
forgotten that they must speak in whispers.

"That officer, eh!--that young officer--don't you remember that fellow
at the band? Eh? Ha, ha, ha! Didn't she whip him smartly, eh?"

The prince jumped up from his seat in renewed terror. When Rogojin
quieted down (which he did at once) the prince bent over him, sat down
beside him, and with painfully beating heart and still more painful
breath, watched his face intently. Rogojin never turned his head, and
seemed to have forgotten all about him. The prince watched and waited.
Time went on--it began to grow light.

Rogojin began to wander--muttering disconnectedly; then he took to
shouting and laughing. The prince stretched out a trembling hand and
gently stroked his hair and his cheeks--he could do nothing more. His
legs trembled again and he seemed to have lost the use of them. A
new sensation came over him, filling his heart and soul with infinite
anguish.

Meanwhile the daylight grew full and strong; and at last the prince
lay down, as though overcome by despair, and laid his face against the
white, motionless face of Rogojin. His tears flowed on to Rogojin's
cheek, though he was perhaps not aware of them himself.

At all events when, after many hours, the door was opened and people
thronged in, they found the murderer unconscious and in a raging fever.
The prince was sitting by him, motionless, and each time that the sick
man gave a laugh, or a shout, he hastened to pass his own trembling hand
over his companion's hair and cheeks, as though trying to soothe and
quiet him. But alas I he understood nothing of what was said to him, and
recognized none of those who surrounded him.

If Schneider himself had arrived then and seen his former pupil and
patient, remembering the prince's condition during the first year in
Switzerland, he would have flung up his hands, despairingly, and cried,
as he did then:

"An idiot!"

XII.

WHEN the widow hurried away to Pavlofsk, she went straight to Daria
Alexeyevna's house, and telling all she knew, threw her into a state of
great alarm. Both ladies decided to communicate at once with Lebedeff,
who, as the friend and landlord of the prince, was also much agitated.
Vera Lebedeff told all she knew, and by Lebedeff's advice it was decided
that all three should go to Petersburg as quickly as possible, in order
to avert "what might so easily happen."

This is how it came about that at eleven o'clock next morning Rogojin's
flat was opened by the police in the presence of Lebedeff, the two
ladies, and Rogojin's own brother, who lived in the wing.

The evidence of the porter went further than anything else towards the
success of Lebedeff in gaining the assistance of the police. He declared
that he had seen Rogojin return to the house last night, accompanied by
a friend, and that both had gone upstairs very secretly and cautiously.
After this there was no hesitation about breaking open the door, since
it could not be got open in any other way.

Rogojin suffered from brain fever for two months. When he recovered from
the attack he was at once brought up on trial for murder.

He gave full, satisfactory, and direct evidence on every point; and the
prince's name was, thanks to this, not brought into the proceedings.
Rogojin was very quiet during the progress of the trial. He did not
contradict his clever and eloquent counsel, who argued that the brain
fever, or inflammation of the brain, was the cause of the crime;
clearly proving that this malady had existed long before the murder was
perpetrated, and had been brought on by the sufferings of the accused.

But Rogojin added no words of his own in confirmation of this view, and
as before, he recounted with marvellous exactness the details of
his crime. He was convicted, but with extenuating circumstances, and
condemned to hard labour in Siberia for fifteen years. He heard his
sentence grimly, silently, and thoughtfully. His colossal fortune, with
the exception of the comparatively small portion wasted in the first
wanton period of his inheritance, went to his brother, to the great
satisfaction of the latter.

The old lady, Rogojin's mother, is still alive, and remembers her
favourite son Parfen sometimes, but not clearly. God spared her the
knowledge of this dreadful calamity which had overtaken her house.

Lebedeff, Keller, Gania, Ptitsin, and many other friends of ours
continue to live as before. There is scarcely any change in them, so
that there is no need to tell of their subsequent doings.

Hippolyte died in great agitation, and rather sooner than he expected,
about a fortnight after Nastasia Philpovna's death. Colia was much
affected by these events, and drew nearer to his mother in heart and
sympathy. Nina Alexandrovna is anxious, because he is "thoughtful beyond
his years," but he will, we think, make a useful and active man.

The prince's further fate was more or less decided by Colia, who
selected, out of all the persons he had met during the last six or seven
months, Evgenie Pavlovitch, as friend and confidant. To him he made over
all that he knew as to the events above recorded, and as to the present
condition of the prince. He was not far wrong in his choice. Evgenie
Pavlovitch took the deepest interest in the fate of the unfortunate
"idiot," and, thanks to his influence, the prince found himself once
more with Dr. Schneider, in Switzerland.

Evgenie Pavlovitch, who went abroad at this time, intending to live a
long while on the continent, being, as he often said, quite superfluous
in Russia, visits his sick friend at Schneider's every few months.

But Dr. Schneider frowns ever more and more and shakes his head; he
hints that the brain is fatally injured; he does not as yet declare that
his patient is incurable, but he allows himself to express the gravest
fears.

Evgenie takes this much to heart, and he has a heart, as is proved
by the fact that he receives and even answers letters from Colia. But
besides this, another trait in his character has become apparent, and as
it is a good trait we will make haste to reveal it. After each visit
to Schneider's establishment, Evgenie Pavlovitch writes another letter,
besides that to Colia, giving the most minute particulars concerning the
invalid's condition. In these letters is to be detected, and in each one
more than the last, a growing feeling of friendship and sympathy.

The individual who corresponds thus with Evgenie Pavlovitch, and who
engages so much of his attention and respect, is Vera Lebedeff. We have
never been able to discover clearly how such relations sprang up.
Of course the root of them was in the events which we have already
recorded, and which so filled Vera with grief on the prince's account
that she fell seriously ill. But exactly how the acquaintance and
friendship came about, we cannot say.

We have spoken of these letters chiefly because in them is often to be
found some news of the Epanchin family, and of Aglaya in particular.
Evgenie Pavlovitch wrote of her from Paris, that after a short and
sudden attachment to a certain Polish count, an exile, she had suddenly
married him, quite against the wishes of her parents, though they had
eventually given their consent through fear of a terrible scandal.
Then, after a six months' silence, Evgenie Pavlovitch informed his
correspondent, in a long letter, full of detail, that while paying his
last visit to Dr. Schneider's establishment, he had there come across
the whole Epanchin family (excepting the general, who had remained in
St. Petersburg) and Prince S. The meeting was a strange one. They
all received Evgenie Pavlovitch with effusive delight; Adelaida and
Alexandra were deeply grateful to him for his "angelic kindness to the
unhappy prince."

Lizabetha Prokofievna, when she saw poor Muishkin, in his enfeebled and
humiliated condition, had wept bitterly. Apparently all was forgiven
him.

Prince S. had made a few just and sensible remarks. It seemed to Evgenie
Pavlovitch that there was not yet perfect harmony between Adelaida and
her fiance, but he thought that in time the impulsive young girl would
let herself be guided by his reason and experience. Besides, the recent
events that had befallen her family had given Adelaida much to think
about, especially the sad experiences of her younger sister. Within six
months, everything that the family had dreaded from the marriage with
the Polish count had come to pass. He turned out to be neither count
nor exile--at least, in the political sense of the word--but had had to
leave his native land owing to some rather dubious affair of the past.
It was his noble patriotism, of which he made a great display, that
had rendered him so interesting in Aglaya's eyes. She was so fascinated
that, even before marrying him, she joined a committee that had been
organized abroad to work for the restoration of Poland; and further,
she visited the confessional of a celebrated Jesuit priest, who made an
absolute fanatic of her. The supposed fortune of the count had dwindled
to a mere nothing, although he had given almost irrefutable evidence of
its existence to Lizabetha Prokofievna and Prince S.

Besides this, before they had been married half a year, the count and
his friend the priest managed to bring about a quarrel between Aglaya
and her family, so that it was now several months since they had seen
her. In a word, there was a great deal to say; but Mrs. Epanchin, and
her daughters, and even Prince S., were still so much distressed by
Aglaya's latest infatuations and adventures, that they did hot care to
talk of them, though they must have known that Evgenie knew much of the
story already.

Poor Lizabetha Prokofievna was most anxious to get home, and, according
to Evgenie's account, she criticized everything foreign with much
hostility.

"They can't bake bread anywhere, decently; and they all freeze in their
houses, during winter, like a lot of mice in a cellar. At all events,
I've had a good Russian cry over this poor fellow," she added, pointing
to the prince, who had not recognized her in the slightest degree.
"So enough of this nonsense; it's time we faced the truth. All this
continental life, all this Europe of yours, and all the trash about
'going abroad' is simply foolery, and it is mere foolery on our part
to come. Remember what I say, my friend; you'll live to agree with me
yourself."

So spoke the good lady, almost angrily, as she took leave of Evgenie
Pavlovitch.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Idiot, by 
(AKA Feodor Dostoevsky) Fyodor Dostoyevsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDIOT ***

***** This file should be named 2638.txt or 2638.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/3/2638/

Produced by Martin Adamson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Facts Concerning The Recent Carnival Of
Crime In Connecticut, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Facts Concerning The Recent Carnival Of Crime In Connecticut

Author: Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Last Updated: February 16, 2009
Release Date: August 19, 2006 [EBook #3183]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARNIVAL OF CRIME ***



Produced by David Widger





THE FACTS CONCERNING THE RECENT CARNIVAL OF CRIME IN CONNECTICUT

by Mark Twain



I was feeling blithe, almost jocund. I put a match to my cigar, and
just then the morning's mail was handed in. The first superscription I
glanced at was in a handwriting that sent a thrill of pleasure through
and through me. It was Aunt Mary's; and she was the person I loved and
honored most in all the world, outside of my own household. She had been
my boyhood's idol; maturity, which is fatal to so many enchantments,
had not been able to dislodge her from her pedestal; no, it had only
justified her right to be there, and placed her dethronement permanently
among the impossibilities. To show how strong her influence over me was,
I will observe that long after everybody else's "do-stop-smoking" had
ceased to affect me in the slightest degree, Aunt Mary could still stir
my torpid conscience into faint signs of life when she touched upon the
matter. But all things have their limit in this world. A happy day came
at last, when even Aunt Mary's words could no longer move me. I was
not merely glad to see that day arrive; I was more than glad--I was
grateful; for when its sun had set, the one alloy that was able to mar
my enjoyment of my aunt's society was gone. The remainder of her stay
with us that winter was in every way a delight. Of course she pleaded
with me just as earnestly as ever, after that blessed day, to quit my
pernicious habit, but to no purpose whatever; the moment she opened
the subject I at once became calmly, peacefully, contentedly
indifferent--absolutely, adamantinely indifferent. Consequently the
closing weeks of that memorable visit melted away as pleasantly as a
dream, they were so freighted for me with tranquil satisfaction. I could
not have enjoyed my pet vice more if my gentle tormentor had been a
smoker herself, and an advocate of the practice. Well, the sight of her
handwriting reminded me that I way getting very hungry to see her again.
I easily guessed what I should find in her letter. I opened it. Good!
just as I expected; she was coming! Coming this very day, too, and by
the morning train; I might expect her any moment.

I said to myself, "I am thoroughly happy and content now. If my most
pitiless enemy could appear before me at this moment, I would freely
right any wrong I may have done him."

Straightway the door opened, and a shriveled, shabby dwarf entered. He
was not more than two feet high. He seemed to be about forty years old.
Every feature and every inch of him was a trifle out of shape; and so,
while one could not put his finger upon any particular part and say,
"This is a conspicuous deformity," the spectator perceived that this
little person was a deformity as a whole--a vague, general, evenly
blended, nicely adjusted deformity. There was a fox-like cunning in the
face and the sharp little eyes, and also alertness and malice. And
yet, this vile bit of human rubbish seemed to bear a sort of remote
and ill-defined resemblance to me! It was dully perceptible in the
mean form, the countenance, and even the clothes, gestures, manner,
and attitudes of the creature. He was a farfetched, dim suggestion of
a burlesque upon me, a caricature of me in little. One thing about him
struck me forcibly and most unpleasantly: he was covered all over with
a fuzzy, greenish mold, such as one sometimes sees upon mildewed bread.
The sight of it was nauseating.

He stepped along with a chipper air, and flung himself into a doll's
chair in a very free-and-easy way, without waiting to be asked. He
tossed his hat into the waste-basket. He picked up my old chalk pipe
from the floor, gave the stem a wipe or two on his knee, filled the
bowl from the tobacco-box at his side, and said to me in a tone of pert
command:

"Gimme a match!"

I blushed to the roots of my hair; partly with indignation, but mainly
because it somehow seemed to me that this whole performance was very
like an exaggeration of conduct which I myself had sometimes been
guilty of in my intercourse with familiar friends--but never, never with
strangers, I observed to myself. I wanted to kick the pygmy into the
fire, but some incomprehensible sense of being legally and legitimately
under his authority forced me to obey his order. He applied the match
to the pipe, took a contemplative whiff or two, and remarked, in an
irritatingly familiar way:

"Seems to me it's devilish odd weather for this time of year."

I flushed again, and in anger and humiliation as before; for the
language was hardly an exaggeration of some that I have uttered in
my day, and moreover was delivered in a tone of voice and with an
exasperating drawl that had the seeming of a deliberate travesty of my
style. Now there is nothing I am quite so sensitive about as a mocking
imitation of my drawling infirmity of speech. I spoke up sharply and
said:

"Look here, you miserable ash-cat! you will have to give a little more
attention to your manners, or I will throw you out of the window!"

The manikin smiled a smile of malicious content and security, puffed
a whiff of smoke contemptuously toward me, and said, with a still more
elaborate drawl:

"Come--go gently now; don't put on too many airs with your betters."

This cool snub rasped me all over, but it seemed to subjugate me, too,
for a moment. The pygmy contemplated me awhile with his weasel eyes, and
then said, in a peculiarly sneering way:

"You turned a tramp away from your door this morning."

I said crustily:

"Perhaps I did, perhaps I didn't. How do you know?"

"Well, I know. It isn't any matter how I know."

"Very well. Suppose I did turn a tramp away from the door--what of it?"

"Oh, nothing; nothing in particular. Only you lied to him."

"I didn't! That is, I--"

"Yes, but you did; you lied to him."

I felt a guilty pang--in truth, I had felt it forty times before that
tramp had traveled a block from my door--but still I resolved to make a
show of feeling slandered; so I said:

"This is a baseless impertinence. I said to the tramp--"

"There--wait. You were about to lie again. I know what you said to him.
You said the cook was gone down-town and there was nothing left from
breakfast. Two lies. You knew the cook was behind the door, and plenty
of provisions behind her."

This astonishing accuracy silenced me; and it filled me with wondering
speculations, too, as to how this cub could have got his information. Of
course he could have culled the conversation from the tramp, but by what
sort of magic had he contrived to find out about the concealed cook? Now
the dwarf spoke again:

"It was rather pitiful, rather small, in you to refuse to read that poor
young woman's manuscript the other day, and give her an opinion as to
its literary value; and she had come so far, too, and so hopefully. Now
wasn't it?"

I felt like a cur! And I had felt so every time the thing had recurred
to my mind, I may as well confess. I flushed hotly and said:

"Look here, have you nothing better to do than prowl around prying into
other people's business? Did that girl tell you that?"

"Never mind whether she did or not. The main thing is, you did that
contemptible thing. And you felt ashamed of it afterward. Aha! you feel
ashamed of it now!"

This was a sort of devilish glee. With fiery earnestness I responded:

"I told that girl, in the kindest, gentlest way, that I could not
consent to deliver judgment upon any one's manuscript, because an
individual's verdict was worthless. It might underrate a work of high
merit and lose it to the world, or it might overrate a trashy production
and so open the way for its infliction upon the world: I said that the
great public was the only tribunal competent to sit in judgment upon
a literary effort, and therefore it must be best to lay it before that
tribunal in the outset, since in the end it must stand or fall by that
mighty court's decision anyway."

"Yes, you said all that. So you did, you juggling, small-souled
shuffler! And yet when the happy hopefulness faded out of that poor
girl's face, when you saw her furtively slip beneath her shawl the
scroll she had so patiently and honestly scribbled at--so ashamed of her
darling now, so proud of it before--when you saw the gladness go out of
her eyes and the tears come there, when she crept away so humbly who had
come so--"

"Oh, peace! peace! peace! Blister your merciless tongue, haven't all
these thoughts tortured me enough without your coming here to fetch them
back again!"

Remorse! remorse! It seemed to me that it would eat the very heart out
of me! And yet that small fiend only sat there leering at me with joy
and contempt, and placidly chuckling. Presently he began to speak again.
Every sentence was an accusation, and every accusation a truth. Every
clause was freighted with sarcasm and derision, every slow-dropping word
burned like vitriol. The dwarf reminded me of times when I had flown at
my children in anger and punished them for faults which a little inquiry
would have taught me that others, and not they, had committed. He
reminded me of how I had disloyally allowed old friends to be traduced
in my hearing, and been too craven to utter a word in their defense. He
reminded me of many dishonest things which I had done; of many which I
had procured to be done by children and other irresponsible persons; of
some which I had planned, thought upon, and longed to do, and been
kept from the performance by fear of consequences only. With exquisite
cruelty he recalled to my mind, item by item, wrongs and unkindnesses I
had inflicted and humiliations I had put upon friends since dead, "who
died thinking of those injuries, maybe, and grieving over them," he
added, by way of poison to the stab.

"For instance," said he, "take the case of your younger brother, when
you two were boys together, many a long year ago. He always lovingly
trusted in you with a fidelity that your manifold treacheries were not
able to shake. He followed you about like a dog, content to suffer wrong
and abuse if he might only be with you; patient under these injuries
so long as it was your hand that inflicted them. The latest picture you
have of him in health and strength must be such a comfort to you! You
pledged your honor that if he would let you blindfold him no harm should
come to him; and then, giggling and choking over the rare fun of the
joke, you led him to a brook thinly glazed with ice, and pushed him
in; and how you did laugh! Man, you will never forget the gentle,
reproachful look he gave you as he struggled shivering out, if you live
a thousand years! Oh! you see it now, you see it now!"

"Beast, I have seen it a million times, and shall see it a million more!
and may you rot away piecemeal, and suffer till doomsday what I suffer
now, for bringing it back to me again!"

The dwarf chuckled contentedly, and went on with his accusing history
of my career. I dropped into a moody, vengeful state, and suffered in
silence under the merciless lash. At last this remark of his gave me a
sudden rouse:

"Two months ago, on a Tuesday, you woke up, away in the night, and fell
to thinking, with shame, about a peculiarly mean and pitiful act of
yours toward a poor ignorant Indian in the wilds of the Rocky Mountains
in the winter of eighteen hundred and--"

"Stop a moment, devil! Stop! Do you mean to tell me that even my very
thoughts are not hidden from you?"

"It seems to look like that. Didn't you think the thoughts I have just
mentioned?"

"If I didn't, I wish I may never breathe again! Look here, friend--look
me in the eye. Who are you?"

"Well, who do you think?"

"I think you are Satan himself. I think you are the devil."

"No."

"No? Then who can you be?"

"Would you really like to know?"

"Indeed I would."

"Well, I am your Conscience!"

In an instant I was in a blaze of joy and exultation. I sprang at the
creature, roaring:

"Curse you, I have wished a hundred million times that you were
tangible, and that I could get my hands on your throat once! Oh, but I
will wreak a deadly vengeance on--"

Folly! Lightning does not move more quickly than my Conscience did!
He darted aloft so suddenly that in the moment my fingers clutched the
empty air he was already perched on the top of the high bookcase, with
his thumb at his nose in token of derision. I flung the poker at him,
and missed. I fired the bootjack. In a blind rage I flew from place to
place, and snatched and hurled any missile that came handy; the storm of
books, inkstands, and chunks of coal gloomed the air and beat about the
manikin's perch relentlessly, but all to no purpose; the nimble figure
dodged every shot; and not only that, but burst into a cackle of
sarcastic and triumphant laughter as I sat down exhausted. While I
puffed and gasped with fatigue and excitement, my Conscience talked to
this effect:

"My good slave, you are curiously witless--no, I mean characteristically
so. In truth, you are always consistent, always yourself, always an
ass. Other wise it must have occurred to you that if you attempted this
murder with a sad heart and a heavy conscience, I would droop under the
burdening in influence instantly. Fool, I should have weighed a ton, and
could not have budged from the floor; but instead, you are so cheerfully
anxious to kill me that your conscience is as light as a feather;
hence I am away up here out of your reach. I can almost respect a mere
ordinary sort of fool; but you pah!"

I would have given anything, then, to be heavyhearted, so that I could
get this person down from there and take his life, but I could no more
be heavy-hearted over such a desire than I could have sorrowed over its
accomplishment. So I could only look longingly up at my master, and rave
at the ill luck that denied me a heavy conscience the one only time that
I had ever wanted such a thing in my life. By and by I got to musing
over the hour's strange adventure, and of course my human curiosity
began to work. I set myself to framing in my mind some questions for
this fiend to answer. Just then one of my boys entered, leaving the door
open behind him, and exclaimed:

"My! what has been going on here? The bookcase is all one riddle of--"

I sprang up in consternation, and shouted:

"Out of this! Hurry! jump! Fly! Shut the door! Quick, or my Conscience
will get away!"

The door slammed to, and I locked it. I glanced up and was grateful, to
the bottom of my heart, to see that my owner was still my prisoner. I
said:

"Hang you, I might have lost you! Children are the heedlessest
creatures. But look here, friend, the boy did not seem to notice you at
all; how is that?"

"For a very good reason. I am invisible to all but you."

I made a mental note of that piece of information with a good deal of
satisfaction. I could kill this miscreant now, if I got a chance, and no
one would know it. But this very reflection made me so lighthearted that
my Conscience could hardly keep his seat, but was like to float aloft
toward the ceiling like a toy balloon. I said, presently:

"Come, my Conscience, let us be friendly. Let us fly a flag of truce for
a while. I am suffering to ask you some questions."

"Very well. Begin."

"Well, then, in the first place, why were you never visible to me
before?"

"Because you never asked to see me before; that is, you never asked in
the right spirit and the proper form before. You were just in the right
spirit this time, and when you called for your most pitiless enemy I was
that person by a very large majority, though you did not suspect it."

"Well, did that remark of mine turn you into flesh and blood?"

"No. It only made me visible to you. I am unsubstantial, just as other
spirits are."

This remark prodded me with a sharp misgiving.

If he was unsubstantial, how was I going to kill him? But I dissembled,
and said persuasively:

"Conscience, it isn't sociable of you to keep at such a distance. Come
down and take another smoke."

This was answered with a look that was full of derision, and with this
observation added:

"Come where you can get at me and kill me? The invitation is declined
with thanks."

"All right," said I to myself; "so it seems a spirit can be killed,
after all; there will be one spirit lacking in this world, presently, or
I lose my guess." Then I said aloud:

"Friend--"

"There; wait a bit. I am not your friend. I am your enemy; I am not your
equal, I am your master, Call me 'my lord,' if you please. You are too
familiar."

"I don't like such titles. I am willing to call you, sir. That is as far
as--"

"We will have no argument about this. Just obey, that is all. Go on with
your chatter."

"Very well, my lord--since nothing but my lord will suit you--I was
going to ask you how long you will be visible to me?"

"Always!"

I broke out with strong indignation: "This is simply an outrage. That is
what I think of it! You have dogged, and dogged, and dogged me, all the
days of my life, invisible. That was misery enough, now to have such a
looking thing as you tagging after me like another shadow all the rest
of my day is an intolerable prospect. You have my opinion my lord, make
the most of it."

"My lad, there was never so pleased a conscience in this world as I was
when you made me visible. It gives me an inconceivable advantage. Now I
can look you straight in the eye, and call you names, and leer at you,
jeer at you, sneer at you; and you know what eloquence there is in
visible gesture and expression, more especially when the effect is
heightened by audible speech. I shall always address you henceforth in
your o-w-n s-n-i-v-e-l-i-n-g d-r-a-w-l--baby!"

I let fly with the coal-hod. No result. My lord said:

"Come, come! Remember the flag of truce!"

"Ah, I forgot that. I will try to be civil; and you try it, too, for a
novelty. The idea of a civil conscience! It is a good joke; an excellent
joke. All the consciences I have ever heard of were nagging, badgering,
fault-finding, execrable savages! Yes; and always in a sweat about some
poor little insignificant trifle or other--destruction catch the lot
of them, I say! I would trade mine for the smallpox and seven kinds of
consumption, and be glad of the chance. Now tell me, why is it that a
conscience can't haul a man over the coals once, for an offense, and
then let him alone? Why is it that it wants to keep on pegging at him,
day and night and night and day, week in and week out, forever and ever,
about the same old thing? There is no sense in that, and no reason in
it. I think a conscience that will act like that is meaner than the very
dirt itself."

"Well, WE like it; that suffices."

"Do you do it with the honest intent to improve a man?"

That question produced a sarcastic smile, and this reply:

"No, sir. Excuse me. We do it simply because it is 'business.' It is
our trade. The purpose of it is to improve the man, but we are merely
disinterested agents. We are appointed by authority, and haven't
anything to say in the matter. We obey orders and leave the consequences
where they belong. But I am willing to admit this much: we do crowd
the orders a trifle when we get a chance, which is most of the time. We
enjoy it. We are instructed to remind a man a few times of an error; and
I don't mind acknowledging that we try to give pretty good measure. And
when we get hold of a man of a peculiarly sensitive nature, oh, but
we do haze him! I have consciences to come all the way from China and
Russia to see a person of that kind put through his paces, on a special
occasion. Why, I knew a man of that sort who had accidentally crippled
a mulatto baby; the news went abroad, and I wish you may never commit
another sin if the consciences didn't flock from all over the earth
to enjoy the fun and help his master exorcise him. That man walked the
floor in torture for forty-eight hours, without eating or sleeping, and
then blew his brains out. The child was perfectly well again in three
weeks."

"Well, you are a precious crew, not to put it too strong. I think I
begin to see now why you have always been a trifle inconsistent with me.
In your anxiety to get all the juice you can out of a sin, you make
a man repent of it in three or four different ways. For instance, you
found fault with me for lying to that tramp, and I suffered over that.
But it was only yesterday that I told a tramp the square truth, to wit,
that, it being regarded as bad citizenship to encourage vagrancy, I
would give him nothing. What did you do then: Why, you made me say to
myself, 'Ah, it would have been so much kinder and more blameless to
ease him off with a little white lie, and send him away feeling that if
he could not have bread, the gentle treatment was at least something to
be grateful for!' Well, I suffered all day about that. Three days before
I had fed a tramp, and fed him freely, supposing it a virtuous act.
Straight off you said, 'Oh, false citizen, to have fed a tramp!' and I
suffered as usual. I gave a tramp work; you objected to it--after the
contract was made, of course; you never speak up beforehand. Next, I
refused a tramp work; you objected to that. Next, I proposed to kill a
tramp; you kept me awake all night, oozing remorse at every pore. Sure
I was going to be right this time, I sent the next tramp away with my
benediction; and I wish you may live as long as I do, if you didn't make
me smart all night again because I didn't kill him. Is there any way of
satisfying that malignant invention which is called a conscience?"

"Ha, ha! this is luxury! Go on!"

"But come, now, answer me that question. Is there any way?"

"Well, none that I propose to tell you, my son. Ass! I don't care what
act you may turn your hand to, I can straightway whisper a word in your
ear and make you think you have committed a dreadful meanness. It is my
business--and my joy--to make you repent of everything you do. If I have
fooled away any opportunities it was not intentional; I beg to assure
you it was not intentional!"

"Don't worry; you haven't missed a trick that I know of. I never did a
thing in all my life, virtuous or otherwise, that I didn't repent of in
twenty-four hours. In church last Sunday I listened to a charity sermon.
My first impulse was to give three hundred and fifty dollars; I repented
of that and reduced it a hundred; repented of that and reduced it
another hundred; repented of that and reduced it another hundred;
repented of that and reduced the remaining fifty to twenty-five;
repented of that and came down to fifteen; repented of that and dropped
to two dollars and a half; when the plate came around at last, I
repented once more and contributed ten cents. Well, when I got home, I
did wish to goodness I had that ten cents back again! You never did
let me get through a charity sermon without having something to sweat
about."

"Oh, and I never shall, I never shall. You can always depend on me."

"I think so. Many and many's the restless night I've wanted to take you
by the neck. If I could only get hold of you now!"

"Yes, no doubt. But I am not an ass; I am only the saddle of an ass. But
go on, go on. You entertain me more than I like to confess."

"I am glad of that. (You will not mind my lying a little, to keep in
practice.) Look here; not to be too personal, I think you are about the
shabbiest and most contemptible little shriveled-up reptile that can be
imagined. I am grateful enough that you are invisible to other people,
for I should die with shame to be seen with such a mildewed monkey of a
conscience as you are. Now if you were five or six feet high, and--"

"Oh, come! who is to blame?"

"I don't know."

"Why, you are; nobody else."

"Confound you, I wasn't consulted about your personal appearance."

"I don't care, you had a good deal to do with it, nevertheless. When you
were eight or nine years old, I was seven feet high, and as pretty as a
picture."

"I wish you had died young! So you have grown the wrong way, have you?"

"Some of us grow one way and some the other. You had a large conscience
once; if you've a small conscience now I reckon there are reasons for
it. However, both of us are to blame, you and I. You see, you used to be
conscientious about a great many things; morbidly so, I may say. It was
a great many years ago. You probably do not remember it now. Well, I
took a great interest in my work, and I so enjoyed the anguish which
certain pet sins of yours afflicted you with that I kept pelting at you
until I rather overdid the matter. You began to rebel. Of course I began
to lose ground, then, and shrivel a little--diminish in stature, get
moldy, and grow deformed. The more I weakened, the more stubbornly you
fastened on to those particular sins; till at last the places on my
person that represent those vices became as callous as shark-skin. Take
smoking, for instance. I played that card a little too long, and I lost.
When people plead with you at this late day to quit that vice, that old
callous place seems to enlarge and cover me all over like a shirt of
mail. It exerts a mysterious, smothering effect; and presently I, your
faithful hater, your devoted Conscience, go sound asleep! Sound? It is
no name for it. I couldn't hear it thunder at such a time. You have some
few other vices--perhaps eighty, or maybe ninety--that affect me in much
the same way."

"This is flattering; you must be asleep a good part of your time."

"Yes, of late years. I should be asleep all the time but for the help I
get."

"Who helps you?"

"Other consciences. Whenever a person whose conscience I am acquainted
with tries to plead with you about the vices you are callous to, I get
my friend to give his client a pang concerning some villainy of his
own, and that shuts off his meddling and starts him off to hunt personal
consolation. My field of usefulness is about trimmed down to tramps,
budding authoresses, and that line of goods now; but don't you
worry--I'll harry you on theirs while they last! Just you put your trust
in me."

"I think I can. But if you had only been good enough to mention
these facts some thirty years ago, I should have turned my particular
attention to sin, and I think that by this time I should not only have
had you pretty permanently asleep on the entire list of human vices, but
reduced to the size of a homeopathic pill, at that. That is about the
style of conscience I am pining for. If I only had you shrunk you down
to a homeopathic pill, and could get my hands on you, would I put you in
a glass case for a keepsake? No, sir. I would give you to a yellow dog!
That is where you ought to be--you and all your tribe. You are not fit
to be in society, in my opinion. Now another question. Do you know a
good many consciences in this section?"

"Plenty of them."

"I would give anything to see some of them! Could you bring them here?
And would they be visible to me?"

"Certainly not."

"I suppose I ought to have known that without asking. But no matter,
you can describe them. Tell me about my neighbor Thompson's conscience,
please."

"Very well. I know him intimately; have known him many years. I knew him
when he was eleven feet high and of a faultless figure. But he is very
pasty and tough and misshapen now, and hardly ever interests himself
about anything. As to his present size--well, he sleeps in a cigar-box."

"Likely enough. There are few smaller, meaner men in this region than
Hugh Thompson. Do you know Robinson's conscience?"

"Yes. He is a shade under four and a half feet high; used to be a blond;
is a brunette now, but still shapely and comely."

"Well, Robinson is a good fellow. Do you know Tom Smith's conscience?"

"I have known him from childhood. He was thirteen inches high, and
rather sluggish, when he was two years old--as nearly all of us are at
that age. He is thirty-seven feet high now, and the stateliest figure in
America. His legs are still racked with growing-pains, but he has a good
time, nevertheless. Never sleeps. He is the most active and energetic
member of the New England Conscience Club; is president of it. Night
and day you can find him pegging away at Smith, panting with his labor,
sleeves rolled up, countenance all alive with enjoyment. He has got his
victim splendidly dragooned now. He can make poor Smith imagine that the
most innocent little thing he does is an odious sin; and then he sets to
work and almost tortures the soul out of him about it."

"Smith is the noblest man in all this section, and the purest; and
yet is always breaking his heart because he cannot be good! Only a
conscience could find pleasure in heaping agony upon a spirit like that.
Do you know my aunt Mary's conscience?"

"I have seen her at a distance, but am not acquainted with her. She
lives in the open air altogether, because no door is large enough to
admit her."

"I can believe that. Let me see. Do you know the conscience of that
publisher who once stole some sketches of mine for a 'series' of his,
and then left me to pay the law expenses I had to incur in order to
choke him off?"

"Yes. He has a wide fame. He was exhibited, a month ago, with some
other antiquities, for the benefit of a recent Member of the Cabinet's
conscience that was starving in exile. Tickets and fares were high, but
I traveled for nothing by pretending to be the conscience of an editor,
and got in for half-price by representing myself to be the conscience of
a clergyman. However, the publisher's conscience, which was to have been
the main feature of the entertainment, was a failure--as an exhibition.
He was there, but what of that? The management had provided a microscope
with a magnifying power of only thirty thousand diameters, and so nobody
got to see him, after all. There was great and general dissatisfaction,
of course, but--"

Just here there was an eager footstep on the stair; I opened the door,
and my aunt Mary burst into the room. It was a joyful meeting and a
cheery bombardment of questions and answers concerning family matters
ensued. By and by my aunt said:

"But I am going to abuse you a little now. You promised me, the day I
saw you last, that you would look after the needs of the poor family
around the corner as faithfully as I had done it myself. Well, I found
out by accident that you failed of your promise. Was that right?"

In simple truth, I never had thought of that family a second time! And
now such a splintering pang of guilt shot through me! I glanced up at
my Conscience. Plainly, my heavy heart was affecting him. His body was
drooping forward; he seemed about to fall from the bookcase. My aunt
continued:

"And think how you have neglected my poor protege at the almshouse, you
dear, hard-hearted promise-breaker!" I blushed scarlet, and my tongue
was tied. As the sense of my guilty negligence waxed sharper and
stronger, my Conscience began to sway heavily back and forth; and when
my aunt, after a little pause, said in a grieved tone, "Since you never
once went to see her, maybe it will not distress you now to know that
that poor child died, months ago, utterly friendless and forsaken!" My
Conscience could no longer bear up under the weight of my sufferings,
but tumbled headlong from his high perch and struck the floor with a
dull, leaden thump. He lay there writhing with pain and quaking with
apprehension, but straining every muscle in frantic efforts to get up.
In a fever of expectancy I sprang to the door, locked it, placed my back
against it, and bent a watchful gaze upon my struggling master. Already
my fingers were itching to begin their murderous work.

"Oh, what can be the matter!" exclaimed by aunt, shrinking from me, and
following with her frightened eyes the direction of mine. My breath
was coming in short, quick gasps now, and my excitement was almost
uncontrollable. My aunt cried out:

"Oh, do not look so! You appal me! Oh, what can the matter be? What
is it you see? Why do you stare so? Why do you work your fingers like
that?"

"Peace, woman!" I said, in a hoarse whisper. "Look elsewhere; pay no
attention to me; it is nothing--nothing. I am often this way. It will
pass in a moment. It comes from smoking too much."

My injured lord was up, wild-eyed with terror, and trying to hobble
toward the door. I could hardly breathe, I was so wrought up. My aunt
wrung her hands, and said:

"Oh, I knew how it would be; I knew it would come to this at last! Oh, I
implore you to crush out that fatal habit while it may yet be time!
You must not, you shall not be deaf to my supplications longer!" My
struggling Conscience showed sudden signs of weariness! "Oh, promise me
you will throw off this hateful slavery of tobacco!" My Conscience began
to reel drowsily, and grope with his hands--enchanting spectacle! "I beg
you, I beseech you, I implore you! Your reason is deserting you! There
is madness in your eye! It flames with frenzy! Oh, hear me, hear me, and
be saved! See, I plead with you on my very knees!" As she sank before
me my Conscience reeled again, and then drooped languidly to the floor,
blinking toward me a last supplication for mercy, with heavy eyes. "Oh,
promise, or you are lost! Promise, and be redeemed! Promise! Promise and
live!" With a long-drawn sigh my conquered Conscience closed his eyes
and fell fast asleep!

With an exultant shout I sprang past my aunt, and in an instant I had my
lifelong foe by the throat. After so many years of waiting and longing,
he was mine at last. I tore him to shreds and fragments. I rent the
fragments to bits. I cast the bleeding rubbish into the fire, and drew
into my nostrils the grateful incense of my burnt-offering. At last, and
forever, my Conscience was dead!

I was a free man! I turned upon my poor aunt, who was almost petrified
with terror, and shouted:

"Out of this with your paupers, your charities, your reforms, your
pestilent morals! You behold before you a man whose life-conflict is
done, whose soul is at peace; a man whose heart is dead to sorrow, dead
to suffering, dead to remorse; a man WITHOUT A CONSCIENCE! In my joy I
spare you, though I could throttle you and never feel a pang! Fly!"

She fled. Since that day my life is all bliss. Bliss, unalloyed bliss.
Nothing in all the world could persuade me to have a conscience again.
I settled all my old outstanding scores, and began the world anew. I
killed thirty-eight persons during the first two weeks--all of them
on account of ancient grudges. I burned a dwelling that interrupted my
view. I swindled a widow and some orphans out of their last cow, which
is a very good one, though not thoroughbred, I believe. I have also
committed scores of crimes, of various kinds, and have enjoyed my work
exceedingly, whereas it would formerly have broken my heart and turned
my hair gray, I have no doubt.

In conclusion, I wish to state, by way of advertisement, that medical
colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes, either by the
gross, by cord measurement, or per ton, will do well to examine the lot
in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere, as these were all selected
and prepared by myself, and can be had at a low rate, because I wish to
clear, out my stock and get ready for the spring trade.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Facts Concerning The Recent
Carnival Of Crime In Connecticut, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARNIVAL OF CRIME ***

***** This file should be named 3183.txt or 3183.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/3/1/8/3183/

Produced by David Widger


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿﻿﻿﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gabriel and the Hour Book, by Evaleen Stein

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Gabriel and the Hour Book

Author: Evaleen Stein

Illustrator: Adelaide Everhart

Release Date: January 28, 2009 [EBook #27916]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GABRIEL AND THE HOUR BOOK ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)











Gabriel · and · the Hour · Book

Roses of St. Elizabeth Series

Evaleen·Stein·

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




GABRIEL AND THE HOUR BOOK




Roses of St. Elizabeth Series

          Each 1 vol., small quarto, illustrated and decorated
          in colour.                                     $1.00

          The Roses of Saint Elizabeth
          BY JANE SCOTT WOODRUFF

          Gabriel and the Hour Book
          BY EVALEEN STEIN

          The Enchanted Automobile
          _Translated from the French by_
          MARY J. SAFFORD

          Pussy-Cat Town
          BY MARION AMES TAGGART

          L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
          New England Building
          BOSTON, MASS.


[Illustration: _Gabriel_]




Roses of St. Elizabeth Series

Gabriel and the Hour Book

BY Evaleen Stein


_ILLUSTRATED IN COLOURS BY_

Adelaide Everhart

          L. C. Page & Company
          Boston  Mcmvi



          _Copyright, 1906, by
          L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
          (Incorporated)_

          _All rights reserved_

          _First Impression, July, 1906_


          _COLONIAL PRESS_

          _Electrotyped and Printed by C.H. Simonds & Co.
          Boston, U.S.A._




TO

=My friend=

CAROLINE H. GRIFFITHS




CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                               PAGE

             I. The Little Colour Grinder          1

            II. Brother Stephen's Inspiration     19

           III. Gabriel Interviews the Abbot      35

            IV. The Hour Book                     49

             V. The Count's Tax                   65

            VI. Gabriel's Prayer                  74

           VII. The Book Goes to Lady Anne        89

          VIII. Lady Anne Writes to the King      99

            IX. The King's Messenger             116

             X. Gabriel's Christmas              136

            XI. The King's Illuminator           162





[Illustration]

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  Gabriel                                            _Frontispiece_

  "He saw the Abbot walking up and down"                        38

  "Dreaming of all the beautiful things he meant to paint"      59

  "Taking down the book . . . he unwrapped and unclasped it"    95

  "Began slowly to turn over the pages"                        105

  "He passed a little peasant boy"                             142




Gabriel and the Hour Book




CHAPTER I.

THE LITTLE COLOUR GRINDER


IT was a bright morning of early April, many hundred years ago; and
through all the fields and meadows of Normandy the violets and
cuckoo-buds were just beginning to peep through the tender green of the
young grass. The rows of tall poplar-trees that everywhere, instead of
fences, served to mark off the farms of the country folk, waved in the
spring wind like great, pale green plumes; and among their branches the
earliest robins and field-fares were gaily singing as a little boy
stepped out from a small thatched cottage standing among the fields, and
took his way along the highroad.

That Gabriel Viaud was a peasant lad, any one could have told from the
blouse of blue homespun, and the wooden shoes which he wore; and that he
felt the gladness of the April time could easily be known by the happy
little song he began to sing to himself, and by the eager delight with
which he now and then stooped to pluck a blue violet or to gather a
handful of golden cuckoo-buds.

A mile or two behind him, and hidden by a bend in the road, lay the
little village of St. Martin-de-Bouchage; while in the soft blue
distance ahead of him rose the gray walls of St. Martin's Abbey, whither
he was going.

Indeed, for almost a year now the little boy had been trudging every day
to the Abbey, where he earned a small sum by waiting upon the good
brothers who dwelt there, and who made the beautiful painted books for
which the Abbey had become famous. Gabriel could grind and mix their
colours for them, and prepare the parchment on which they did their
writing, and could do many other little things that helped them in their
work.

The lad enjoyed his tasks at the Abbey, and, above all, delighted in
seeing the beautiful things at which the brothers were always busy; yet,
as he now drew near the gateway, he could not help but give a little
sigh, for it was so bright and sunny out-of-doors. He smiled, though, as
he looked at the gay bunches of blossoms with which he had quite filled
his hands, and felt that at least he was taking a bit of the April in
with him, as he crossed the threshold and entered a large room.

"Good morrow, Gabriel," called out several voices as he came in, for the
lad was a general favourite with the brothers; and Gabriel, respectfully
taking off his blue peasant cap, gave a pleasant "good morrow" to each.

The room in which he stood had plain stone walls and a floor of paved
stone, and little furniture, except a number of solidly made benches and
tables. These were placed beneath a row of high windows, and the tables
were covered with writing and painting materials and pieces of
parchment; for the brotherhood of St. Martin's was very industrious.

In those days,--it was four hundred years ago,--printed books were very
few, and almost unknown to most people; for printing-presses had been
invented only a few years, and so by far the greater number of books in
the world were still made by the patient labour of skilful hands; the
work usually being done by the monks, of whom there were very many at
that time.

These monks, or brothers, as they were often called, lived in
monasteries and abbeys, and were men who banded themselves together in
brotherhoods, taking solemn vows never to have homes of their own or to
mingle in the daily life of others, but to devote their lives to
religion; for they believed that they could serve God better by thus
shutting themselves off from the world.

And so it came about that the brothers, having more time and more
learning than most other people of those days, made it their chief work
to preserve and multiply all the books that were worth keeping. These
they wrote out on parchment (for paper was very scarce so long ago), and
then ornamented the pages with such beautiful painted borders of flowers
and birds and saints and angels, and such lovely initial letters, all in
bright colours and gold, that to this day large numbers of the beautiful
books made by the monks are still kept among the choicest treasures of
the museums and great libraries of the world.

And few of all those wonderful old illuminations (for so the painted
ornaments were called) were lovelier than the work of the brotherhood of
St. Martin's. Gabriel felt very proud even to grind the colours for
them. But as he passed over to one of the tables and began to make ready
his paint mortar, the monk who had charge of the writing-room called to
him, saying:

"Gabriel, do not get out thy work here, for the Abbot hath just ordered
that some one must help Brother Stephen, who is alone in the old
chapter-house. He hath a special book to make, and his colour-grinder is
fallen ill; so go thou at once and take Jacques's place."

So Gabriel left the writing-room and passed down the long corridor that
led to the chapter-house. This was a room the brothers had kept for
years as a meeting-place, when they and the Abbot, who governed them
all, wished to talk over the affairs of the Abbey; but as it had at last
grown too small for them, they had built a new and larger one; and so
the old chapter-house was seldom used any more.

Gabriel knew this, and he wondered much why Brother Stephen chose to
work there rather than in the regular writing-room with the others. He
supposed, however, that, for some reason of his own, Brother Stephen
preferred to be alone.

He did not know that the monk, at that moment, was sitting moodily by
his work-table, his eyes staring aimlessly ahead of him, and his hands
dropped idly in his lap. For Brother Stephen was feeling very cross and
unhappy and out of sorts with all the world. And this was the reason:
poor Brother Stephen had entered the Abbey when a lad scarcely older
than Gabriel. He had come of good family, but had been left an orphan
with no one to care for him, and for want of other home had been sent to
the Abbey, to be trained for the brotherhood; for in those days there
were few places where fatherless and motherless children could be taken
care of.

As little Jean (for this was his name before he joined the monks, when
one's own name was always changed) grew up, he took the solemn vows
which bound him to the rules of the brotherhood without realizing what
it all would mean to him; for Brother Stephen was a born artist; and, by
and by, he began to feel that while life in the Abbey was well for most
of the brothers, for him it was not well. He wanted to be free to wander
about the world; to paint pictures of many things; and to go from city
to city, and see and study the work of the world's great artists.

It is true he spent the greater part of his time in the Abbey working on
the illuminated books, and this he loved; yet it did not wholly satisfy
him. He longed to paint other things, and, above all, his artist nature
longed for freedom from all the little rules of daily life that
governed the days of the brotherhood.

Brother Stephen had brooded much over this desire for freedom, and only
the day before had sought out the Abbot of St. Martin's and asked to be
released from the vows of obedience which he had taken years before, but
which now he found so hard to live up to. But, to his great
disappointment, the Abbot had refused to grant his request.

The Abbot had several reasons for this refusal; one of them was that he
himself dearly loved all the little daily ceremonies of the Abbey, and
he could not understand why any one who had once lived there could
prefer a life in the world. He really thought it was for Brother
Stephen's own good that he should stay in the brotherhood.

And then, too, perhaps there was another reason less to the Abbot's
credit; and this reason was that of all the beautiful illuminated books
for which the Abbey of St. Martin's had become so famous, none were
quite so exquisitely done as those made by Brother Stephen. So perhaps
the Abbot did not wish to lose so skilful an artist from the work-room
of the Abbey, and especially at this particular time. For just before
Brother Stephen had had his talk with the Abbot, a messenger from the
city of Paris had come to the Abbey, bearing an order from the king,
Louis XII., who reigned over France, and Normandy also, which was a part
of France.

Now the following winter, the king was to wed the Lady Anne of Bretagne;
and as Lady Anne was a great admirer and collector of beautiful painted
books, the king thought no gift would please his bride quite so much as
a piece of fine illumination; and he decided that it should be an hour
book. These books were so called because in them were written different
parts of the Bible, intended to be read at certain hours of the day; for
most people at that time were very devout, and the great ladies
especially were very fond of having their hour books made as beautiful
as possible.

As King Louis thought over the best places where he might have his
bride's gift painted, at last he made up his mind to send to the monks
of St. Martin's. He commanded that the hour book be done in the most
beautiful style, and that it must be finished by the following December.

The Abbot was delighted with the honour the king had shown the Abbey in
sending this order; and he determined that Brother Stephen should stay
and make the entire book, as no one else wrote so evenly, or made quite
such lovely initials and borders as did he.

When the Abbot told this to Brother Stephen, however, it was a pity
that he did so in such a cold and haughty way that altogether Brother
Stephen's anger was aroused, for he had a rather unruly temper; and so,
smarting under the disappointment of not receiving his liberty, and
feeling that the book for Lady Anne was one cause of this, he had spoken
angrily and disrespectfully to the Abbot, and refused point-blank to
touch the king's order.

At this the Abbot in his turn became angry, and declared that Brother
Stephen should be compelled to paint the hour book whether he wished to
or not; that he must do it as punishment for his unruly conduct; and the
Abbot threatened, moreover, that if he did not obey, he would be placed
under the ban of the Church, which was considered by all the brotherhood
as a dreadful misfortune.

And so with this threat hanging over him, that very morning, just before
Gabriel reached the Abbey, Brother Stephen had been sent to the old
chapter-house, where he was ordered to work by himself, and to begin the
book at once. And to complete his humiliation, and for fear he might try
to run away, the Abbot caused him to be chained to one of the legs of
the heavy work-table; and this chain he was to wear every day during
working hours.

Now all this made Brother Stephen very angry and unhappy, and his heart
was full of bitterness toward the Abbot and all of the brotherhood and
the world in general, when all at once he heard Gabriel's knock at the
door; and then, in another moment, the door was softly pushed open, and
there, on the threshold, stood the little boy.




CHAPTER II.

BROTHER STEPHEN'S INSPIRATION


GABRIEL knew nothing of Brother Stephen's troubles, and so was smiling
happily as he stepped into the room, holding his cap in one hand, while
with his other arm he hugged to him his large bunch of violets and
cuckoo-buds. Indeed he looked so bright and full of life that even
Brother Stephen felt the effect of it, and his frown began to smooth out
a little as he said:

"Well, my lad, who art thou?"

"I am Gabriel Viaud, Brother Stephen," answered the boy, "and I have
come to help you; for they told me Jacques is fallen ill. What would you
like me to do first?"

To this Brother Stephen scarcely knew what to reply. He was certainly in
no mood for work. He was still very, very angry, and thought himself
terribly misused by the Abbot; and though he greatly dreaded the
latter's threats, he had almost reached the point of defying him and the
king and everybody else, no matter what dreadful thing happened to him
afterward.

But then as he looked again at the bright-faced little boy standing
there, and seeming so eager to help, he began to relent more and more;
and besides, he found it decidedly embarrassing to try to explain things
to Gabriel.

So after a little pause, he said to him: "Gabriel, I am not ready for
thee at this moment; go sit on yonder bench. I wish to think out a
matter which is perplexing me." Then as Gabriel obediently went over to
the bench and seated himself, he added: "Thou canst pass the time
looking at the books on the shelf above thee."

So while Brother Stephen was trying to make up his mind as to what he
would do, Gabriel took down one of the books, and was soon absorbed in
its pages. Presently, as he turned a new one, he gave a little
involuntary exclamation of delight. At this Brother Stephen noticed him,
and--

"Ah!" he said, "what hast thou found that seems to please thee?"

"Oh, sir," answered Gabriel, "this is the most beautiful initial letter
I have ever seen!"

Now Gabriel did not know that the book had been made a few years before
by Brother Stephen himself, and so he had no idea how much it pleased
the brother to have his work admired.

Indeed, most people who do good work of any kind oftentimes feel the
need of praise; not flattery, but the real approval of some one who
understands what they are trying to do. It makes the workman or artist
feel that if his work is liked by somebody, it is worth while to try to
do more and better.

Poor Brother Stephen did not get much of this needed praise, for many of
the other monks at the Abbey were envious of him, and so were unwilling
really to admire his work; while the Abbot was so cold and haughty and
so taken up with his own affairs, that he seldom took the trouble to say
what he liked or disliked.

So when Brother Stephen saw Gabriel's eager admiration, he felt pleased
indeed; for Gabriel had a nice taste in artistic things, and seemed
instinctively to pick out the best points of anything he looked at. And
when, in his enthusiasm, he carried the book over and began to tell
Brother Stephen why he so much admired the painting, without knowing it,
he really made the latter feel happier than he had felt for many a day.
He began to have a decided notion that he would paint King Louis's book
after all. And just then, as if to settle the matter, he happened to
glance at the corner of the table where Gabriel had laid down his bunch
of flowers as he came in.

It chanced that some of the violets had fallen from the cluster and
dropped upon a broad ruler of brass that lay beside the painting
materials. And even as Brother Stephen looked, it chanced also that a
little white butterfly drifted into the room through the bars of the
high, open window; after vaguely fluttering about for a while, at last,
attracted by the blossoms, it came, and, poising lightly over the
violets on the ruler, began to sip the honey from the heart of one of
them.

As Brother Stephen's artistic eye took in the beauty of effect made by
the few flowers on the brass ruler with the butterfly hovering over
them, he, too, gave a little exclamation, and his eyes brightened and he
smiled; for he had just got a new idea for an illuminated border.

"Yes," he said to himself, "this would be different from any I have yet
seen! I will decorate King Louis's book with borders of gold; and on the
gold I will paint the meadow wildflowers, and the bees and butterflies,
and all the little flying creatures."

Now before this, all the borders of the Abbey books had been painted, in
the usual manner of the time, with scrolls and birds and flowers more or
less conventionalized; that is, the artists did not try to make them
look exactly like the real ones, but twisted them about in all sorts of
fantastic ways. Sometimes the stem of a flower would end in the
curled-up folds of a winged dragon, or a bird would have strange
blossoms growing out of his beak, or perhaps the tips of his wings.

These borders were indeed exquisitely beautiful, but Brother Stephen
was just tired of it all, and wanted to do something quite different; so
he was delighted with his new idea of painting the field-flowers exactly
like nature, only placing them on a background of gold.

As he pictured in his mind one page after another thus adorned, he
became more and more interested and impatient to begin at once. He
forgot all about his anger at the Abbot; he forgot everything else,
except that he wanted to begin King Louis's book as quickly as possible!

And so he called briskly to Gabriel, who meantime had reseated himself
on his bench:

"Gabriel, come hither! Canst thou rule lines without blotting? Canst
thou make ink and grind colours and prepare gold size?"

"Yes, sir," said Gabriel, surprised at the monk's eager manner, "I have
worked at all these things."

"Good!" replied Brother Stephen. "Here is a piece of parchment thou
canst cut and prepare, and then rule it, thus" (and here he showed him
how he wished it done), "with scarlet ink. But do not take yonder brass
ruler! Here is one of ivory thou canst use instead."

And then as Gabriel went to work, Brother Stephen, taking a goose-quill
pen and some black ink, began skilfully and carefully to make drawings
of the violets as they lay on the ruler, not forgetting the white
butterfly which still hovered about. The harder he worked the happier he
grew; hour after hour passed, till at last the dinner time came, and
Gabriel, who was growing very hungry, could hear the footsteps of the
brothers, as they marched into the large dining-room where they all ate
together.

Brother Stephen, however, was so absorbed that he did not notice
anything; till, by and by, the door opened, and in came two monks, one
carrying some soup and bread and a flagon of wine. As they entered,
Brother Stephen turned quickly, and was about to rise, when all at once
he felt the tug of the chain still fastened about the leg of the table;
at this his face grew scarlet with shame, and he sank back in his
chair.

Gabriel started with surprise, for he had not before seen the chain,
partly hidden as it was by the folds of the brother's robe. As he
looked, one of the two monks went to the table, and, with a key which he
carried, unlocked the chain so Brother Stephen might have a half-hour's
liberty while he ate. The monks, however, stayed with him to keep an eye
on his movements; and meantime they told Gabriel to go out to the Abbey
kitchen and find something for his own dinner.

As Gabriel went out along the corridor to the kitchen, his heart swelled
with pity! Why was Brother Stephen chained? He tried to think, and
remembered that once before he had seen one of the brothers chained to a
table in the writing-room because he was not diligent enough with his
work,--but Brother Stephen! Was he not working so hard? And how
beautiful, too, were his drawings! The more Gabriel thought of it the
more indignant he grew. Indeed, he did not half-enjoy the bread and
savoury soup made of black beans, that the cook dished out for him; he
took his wooden bowl, and sitting on a bench, ate absently, thinking all
the while of Brother Stephen.

When he had finished he went back to the chapter-house and found the
other monks gone and Brother Stephen again chained. Gabriel felt much
embarrassed to have been obliged to see it; and when Brother Stephen,
pointing to the chain, said bitterly, "Thou seest they were afraid I
would run away from my work," the lad was so much at a loss to know what
to say, that he very wisely said nothing.

Now Brother Stephen, though he had begun the book as the Abbot wished,
yet he had by no means the meek and penitent spirit which also the Abbot
desired of him, and which it was proper for a monk to have.

And so if the truth must be told, each time the other monks came in to
chain him, he felt more than anything else like seizing both of them,
and thrusting them bodily out of the door, or at least trying to do so.
But then he could not forget the Abbot's threat if he showed
disobedience; and he had been brought up to dread the ban of the Church
more than anything else that could possibly happen to him, because he
believed that this would make him unhappy, not only in this life, but in
the life to come. And so he smothered his feelings and tried to bear the
humiliation as patiently as he could.

Gabriel could not help but see, however, that it took him some time to
regain the interest he had felt in his work, and it was not until the
afternoon was half-gone that he seemed to forget his troubles enough
really to have heart in the pages he was making.

When dusk fell, Gabriel picked up and arranged his things in order, and
bidding Brother Stephen good night, trudged off home.




CHAPTER III.

GABRIEL INTERVIEWS THE ABBOT


THE next day of Gabriel's service passed off much the same as the first,
and so it went for almost a week; but the boy saw day by day that
Brother Stephen's chain became more and more unbearable to him, and that
he had long fits of brooding, when he looked so miserable and unhappy
that Gabriel's heart fairly ached for him.

At last the lad, who was a sympathetic little fellow, felt that he
could stand it no longer, but must try and help him in some way.

"If I could only speak to the Abbot himself," thought Gabriel, "surely
he would see that Brother Stephen is set free!"

The Abbot, however, was a very stately and dignified person; and Gabriel
did not quite see how a little peasant boy like himself could find an
opportunity to speak to him, or how he would dare to say anything even
if he had a chance.

Now it happened the very morning that Gabriel was thinking about all
this, he was out in the Abbey kitchen beating up the white of a nice
fresh egg which he had brought with him from home that day. He had the
egg in an earthen bowl, and was working away with a curious wooden
beater, for few people had forks in those days. And as he beat up the
white froth, the Abbey cooks also were very busy making pasties, and
roasting huge pieces of meat before the great open fireplace, and baking
loaves of sweet Normandy bread for the monks' dinner.

But Gabriel was not helping them; no, he was beating the egg for Brother
Stephen to use in putting on the gold in the border he was painting. For
the brothers did not have the imitation gold powders of which we see so
much to-day; but instead, they used real gold, which they ground up very
fine in earthen mortars, and took much trouble to properly prepare. And
when they wanted to lay it on, they commonly used the white of a fresh
egg to fasten it to the parchment.

[Illustration: "_He saw the Abbot walking up and down_"]

So Gabriel was working as fast as he could, for Brother Stephen was
waiting; when all at once he happened to look out the kitchen door,
which opened on a courtyard where there was a pretty garden, and he saw
the Abbot walking up and down the gravel paths, and now and then
stopping to see how the tulips and daffodils were coming on.

As Gabriel looked, the Abbot seated himself on a stone bench; and then
the little boy, forgetting his awe of him, and thinking only of Brother
Stephen and his chain ran out as fast as he could, still holding his
bowl in one hand and the wooden beater in the other.

As he came up to where the Abbot was sitting, he courtesied in such
haste that he spilled out half his egg as he eagerly burst out:

"O reverend Father! will you not command Brother Stephen to be set free
from his chain?"

The Abbot at first had smiled at the droll figure made by the little
boy, whom he supposed to be one of the kitchen scullions, but at this
speech he stiffened up and looked very stern as Gabriel went on
breathlessly:

"He is making such a beautiful book, and he works so hard; but the chain
is so dreadful to him, and I was sure that if you knew they had put it
on him, you would not allow it!"

Here the Abbot began to feel a trifle uncomfortable, for he saw that
Gabriel did not know that he himself had ordered Brother Stephen to wear
the chain. But he mentioned nothing of this as he spoke to Gabriel.

"Boy," he said, severely, "what affair of thine is this matter about
Brother Stephen? Doubtless if he is chained, it is a punishment he hath
merited. 'Tis scarcely becoming in a lad like thee to question these
things." And then, as he looked sharply at Gabriel, he added, "Did
Brother Stephen send thee hither? Who art thou?"

At this Gabriel hung his head, and, "Nay, sir," he answered, simply, "he
does not know, and perhaps he will be angry with me! I am his
colour-grinder, and I was in the kitchen getting the egg for his
gold,"--here suddenly Gabriel remembered his bowl, and looking down in
dismay, "Oh, sir," he exclaimed, "I have spilled the egg, and it was
fresh-laid this morning by my white hen!" Here the boy looked so
honestly distressed that the Abbot could not but believe that he spoke
the truth, and so he smiled a little as he said, not unkindly:

"Well, never mind about thy hen,--go on; thou wast in the kitchen, and
then what?"

"I saw you in the garden," answered Gabriel, "and--and--I thought that
if you knew about the chain, you would not like it;" (here the Abbot
began to look very stern again); "and," Gabriel added, "I could not bear
to see Brother Stephen so unhappy. I know he is unhappy, for whenever he
notices the chain, he frowns and his hand trembles so he can hardly
paint!"

"Ah," said the Abbot to himself, "if his hand trembles, that is another
matter." For the Abbot knew perfectly well that in order to do
successfully anything so delicate as a piece of illumination, one must
have a steady hand and untroubled nerves; and he began to think that
perhaps he had gone a little too far in punishing Brother Stephen. So
he thought a minute, and then to Gabriel, who was still standing before
him, not quite knowing what to do, he merely said:

"Go back to thy work, lad, and mind thy colours; and," he added with
haughty dignity, "I will do as I think best about Brother Stephen's
chain."

So Gabriel went back to the kitchen feeling very uncomfortable, for he
was afraid he had displeased the Abbot, and so, perhaps, done more harm
than good to Brother Stephen. While he was quite sure he had displeased
Brother Stephen, for he had kept him waiting a long while, and worse
still, had spilled the best egg there was in the kitchen! However, the
lad begged one of the cooks to let him have another egg, and, whisking
it up as quickly as he could, made haste to carry it to the
chapter-house.

As he pushed open the door, Brother Stephen said, sharply, "How now! I
thought they had chained thee to one of the tables of the kitchen!"

"I am so sorry," said Gabriel, his face very red,--"but--I--I spilled
the first egg and had to make ready another."

He hoped Brother Stephen would not ask him how he happened to spill it;
for by this time he began to realize that the high-spirited monk
probably had reasons of his own for submitting to the punishment of the
chain, and that very likely he would be displeased if he knew that his
little colour-grinder had asked the Abbot to free him. So Gabriel felt
much relieved when, without further questions, Brother Stephen went on
with his work, in which for the moment he was greatly absorbed.

And thus the day went quietly on, till early in the afternoon; when, to
the great surprise of both of them, the door slowly opened, and in
walked the Abbot himself.

The Abbot was haughty, as usual, and, as Brother Stephen saw him come
in, he raised his head with an involuntary look of pride and resentment;
but neither spoke as the Abbot stepped over to the table, and examined
the page on which the monk was working.

This particular page happened to be ornamented with a wide border of
purple flag-flowers, copied from some Gabriel had gathered the day
before in a swampy corner of one of the wayside meadows. Their fresh
green leaves and rich purple petals shone with royal effect against the
background of gold; while hovering over them, and clinging to their
stems, were painted honey-bees, with gauzy wings, and soft,
furry-looking bodies of black and gold.

As the Abbot saw how beautiful it all was, and how different from any
other of the Abbey illuminations, he smiled to himself with pleasure.
For the Abbot, though he never said a great deal, yet very well knew a
good piece of artistic work when he saw it. Instead of merely smiling to
himself, however, it would have made Brother Stephen much happier if he
had taken the trouble to say aloud some of the nice things he was
thinking about the work.

For Brother Stephen felt very bitter as he thought over all he had been
made to bear; and even as the Abbot looked, he saw, sure enough, that
his hand trembled as Gabriel had said; for the poor monk had hard work
to control his feelings.

Now the Abbot really did not mean to be unkind. It was only that he did
not quite know how to unbend; and perhaps feeling this, he soon went
out.

Gabriel, who had been very much afraid he might say something to him
about their conversation of the morning, felt greatly relieved when the
door closed behind him; and the rest of the afternoon he and Brother
Stephen worked on in silence.




CHAPTER IV.

THE HOUR BOOK


BUT the next morning when Gabriel reached the Abbey, to his great joy he
found the chain gone (for the Abbot had so ordered after his visit to
the chapter-house), and Brother Stephen already hard at work, and happy
as a bird. For like many other artist souls, when things went wrong,
Brother Stephen suffered dreadful unhappiness; while, on the other hand,
when pleased, he was full of boundless delight; and so, being relieved
from the chain, he was in one of his most joyous moods.

He smiled brightly as Gabriel entered; and the April sunlight streaming
in through the high narrow windows sparkled so radiantly, and so filled
them with the life and energy and gladness of the spring-time, that each
of them felt as though he could do no end of work, and that King Louis's
book should be one of the most beautiful things in all the world!

And that morning was but the beginning of a long series of happy days
that Brother Stephen and Gabriel were to spend together. At first the
monk knew nothing of how it happened that he was freed from the
humiliation of the chain; but one day he heard about Gabriel's talk
with the Abbot from one of the brotherhood who had chanced to be in the
garden that morning, and had overheard them.

At first Brother Stephen was rather displeased; for he did not like it
that the little boy had begged of the Abbot something which he himself
was too proud to ask. But when he thought it over, and reflected that it
was out of sheer kindness that Gabriel had made the request, his heart
strangely warmed toward the lad. Indeed, through all his life in the
Abbey, no one had ever really cared whether he was happy or unhappy; and
so poor Brother Stephen had had no idea how very pleasant it would be
to have even a little peasant boy take an interest in him. And as day
after day went by, he began to love Gabriel, as he had never before
loved any one.

Yes, those were very happy days for both of them, and very busy ones,
too. Every morning Gabriel would come to the Abbey with his hands filled
with the prettiest wild flowers he could find on the way; and from these
Brother Stephen would select the ones that pleased him best to paint.
Sometimes it would be the sweet wild hyacinths of pale blue, sometimes
the yellow marsh-marigolds, and again the little deep pink field-roses,
or some other of the innumerable lovely blossoms that every season
brought. And with them all, as he had said, he put in the small flying
creatures; butterflies and bees, scarlet ladybugs and pale green
beetles, whose wings looked like scraps of rainbows; and sometimes, in
his zeal, he even painted the little snails with their curled-up shells,
and the fuzzy caterpillars that happened to come in on Gabriel's
bouquets, and you really would never believe how very handsome even
these looked in the gold borders, when Brother Stephen got through with
them.

And so, day by day, the book grew in perfect beauty. And as Brother
Stephen worked, there was much for Gabriel to do also. For in those days
artists could not buy their ink and paints all ready for use as they do
to-day, but were obliged to prepare by hand almost all their materials;
and a little assistant such as Gabriel had to keep his hands busy, and
his eyes open, too.

For instance, the matter of the ink alone, Gabriel had to have on his
mind for weeks; for one could not then buy it ready made, in a bottle,
as we do now without the least trouble, but the monks or their
colour-grinders had to make it themselves.

And this is the way Gabriel had been taught to do it: morning after
morning of those early spring days, as he trudged along on his way to
the Abbey, he kept sharp watch on the young hawthorn-trees by the
roadside; and when their first buds showed, and while they were still
tiny, he gathered armfuls of the boughs, and carried them to the Abbey,
where he spread them out in a sunny corner of the courtyard to stay
until quite dry. Then he had to put them in a stone mortar and pound off
all the bark; and this he put to steep in great earthen jars of water,
until the water might draw all the sap from out the bark. All this took
several weeks to do.

And then Gabriel spent a number of busy days in the great kitchen. There
he had a large saucepan, and in it he placed, a little at a time, the
water in which the bark was steeping; and then raking out some coals
from the blazing fire of logs, he set his saucepan over them, and
watched the barky water until it had boiled down very thick, much as one
boils down syrup for preserves.

Then he dipped out the thick liquid into little bags of parchment, which
he had spent days stitching up very tightly, so that nothing could leak
out. After the little bags were filled, he hung them out-of-doors in the
bright sunlight; and as the days grew warmer and warmer, the sun soon
dried their contents, so that if one of the little bags were opened it
would be found filled with a dark powder.

And then, last of all, when Brother Stephen wished some fresh ink for
his writing, or for the delicate lines about his initial letters or
borders, Gabriel would take a little of the dry powder from one of the
bags, and, putting it in a small saucepan over the fire, would melt it
with a little wine. And so at last it would be ready for use; a fine,
beautiful black ink that hundreds of years have found hard work to fade.

[Illustration: "_Dreaming of all the beautiful things he meant to
paint_"]

Then there was the gold to grind and prepare; that was the hardest of
all, and fairly made his arms ache. Many of the paints, too, had to be
worked over very carefully; and the blue especially, and other brilliant
colours made from vegetable dyes, must be kept in a very curious way.
Brother Stephen would prepare the dyes, as he preferred to do this
himself; and then Gabriel would take little pieces of linen cloth and
dip a few in each of the colours until the linen would be soaked; and
afterward, when they had dried in the sun, he would arrange these bits
in a little booklet of cotton paper, which every night Brother Stephen,
as was the custom with many of the monks, put under his pillow so that
it might keep very dry and warm; for this preserved the colours in all
their brightness. And then when he wanted to use some of them, he would
tell Gabriel to cut off a bit of the linen of whatever colour he wished,
and soak it in water, and in this way he would get a fine liquid
paint.

For holding this paint, as dishes were none too plenty in those days,
mussel shells were generally used; and one of Gabriel's tasks was to
gather numbers of these from the banks of the little river that ran
through one of the Abbey meadows. That was very pleasant work, though,
and sometimes, late in the afternoons of those lovely summer days,
Brother Stephen and Gabriel would walk out together to the edge of this
little river; the monk to sit on the grassy bank dreaming of all the
beautiful things he meant to paint, while Gabriel hunted for the pretty
purple shells.

And oftentimes the lad would bring along a fishing-pole and try his luck
at catching an eel; for even this, too, had to do with the making of the
book. For Brother Stephen in putting on the gold of his borders, while
he generally used white of egg, yet for certain parts preferred a glue
made from the skin of an eel; and this Gabriel could make very finely.

So you see there were a great many things for a little colour-grinder to
do; yet Gabriel was very industrious, and it often happened that he
would finish his tasks for the day, and still have several hours to
himself. And this was the best of all; for at such times Brother
Stephen, who was getting along finely, would take great pleasure in
teaching him to illuminate. He would let the boy take a piece of
parchment, and then giving him beautiful letters and bits of borders,
would show him how to copy them. Indeed, he took so much pains in his
teaching, that very soon Gabriel, who loved the work, and who had a real
talent for it, began to be quite skilful, and to make very good designs
of his own.

Whenever he did anything especially nice, Brother Stephen would seem
almost as much pleased as if Gabriel were his own boy; and hugging him
affectionately, he would exclaim:

"Ah, little one, thou hast indeed the artist soul! And, please God, I
will train thy hand so that when thou art a man it shall never know the
hard toil of the peasant. Thy pen and brush shall earn a livelihood for
thee!" And then he would take more pains than ever to teach Gabriel all
the best knowledge of his art.

Nor did Brother Stephen content himself with teaching the boy only to
paint; but in his love for him, he desired to do still more. He had no
wealth some day to bestow upon him, but he had something that was a very
great deal better; for Brother Stephen, like many of the monks of the
time, had a good education; and this he determined to share with
Gabriel.

He arranged to have him stay at the Abbey for his supper as often as he
could be spared from home; and hour after hour of the long summer
evenings he spent teaching the lad to read and write, which was really
quite a distinction; for it was an accomplishment that none of the
peasants, and very few of the lords and ladies of that time possessed.
Gabriel was quick and eager to learn, and Brother Stephen gradually
added other things to his list of studies, and both of them took the
greatest pleasure in the hours thus passed together.

Sometimes they would go out into the garden, and, sitting on one of the
quaint stone benches, Brother Stephen would point out to Gabriel the
different stars, or tell him about the fragrant growing plants around
them; or, perhaps, repeat to him some dreamy legend of old, old
Normandy.

And then, by and by, Gabriel would go home through the perfumed dark,
feeling vaguely happy; for all the while, through those pleasant
evenings with Brother Stephen, his mind and heart were opening brightly
as the yellow primroses, that blossomed by moonlight over all the Abbey
meadows.




CHAPTER V.

THE COUNT'S TAX


AND in this happy manner the spring and summer wore away and the autumn
came. Brother Stephen felt very cheerful, for the beautiful book grew
more beautiful week by week; and he was very proud and happy, because he
knew it was the loveliest thing he had ever made.

Indeed, he himself was so cheerful, that as the autumn days, one after
another, melted away, it was some little time before he noticed that
Gabriel was losing his merriness, and that he had begun to look sad and
distressed. And finally, one morning, he came looking so very unhappy,
that Brother Stephen asked, with much concern:

"Why, lad, whither have all thy gay spirits taken flight? Art thou ill?"

"Nay, sir," answered Gabriel, sadly; "but oh, Brother Stephen, we are in
so much trouble at home!"

At this the monk at once began to question him, and learned that
Gabriel's family were indeed in great misfortune.

And this is how it came about: in those days the peasant folk had a very
hard time indeed. All of the land through the country was owned by the
great nobles; and the poor peasants, who lived on the little farms into
which the land was divided, had few rights. They could not even move to
another place if they so wished, but were obliged to spend all their
lives under the control of whatever nobleman happened to own the estate
on which they were born.

They lived in little thatched cottages, and cultivated their bits of
land; and as rent for this, each peasant was obliged to help support the
great lord who owned everything, and who always lived in a strong
castle, with armed men under his command.

The peasants had to raise wheat and vegetables and sheep and cows, so
that the people of the castles might eat nice, white bread, and nut
cookies and roast meat; though the poor peasants themselves had to be
content, day after day, with little more than hard, black bread, and
perhaps a single bowl of cabbage or potato soup, from which the whole
family would dip with their wooden spoons.

Then, too, the peasants oftentimes had to pay taxes when their noble
lord wished to raise money, and even to follow him to war if he so
commanded, though this did not often happen.

And now we come to the reason for Gabriel's troubles. It seems that the
Count Pierre de Bouchage, to whose estate Gabriel's family belonged,
had got into a quarrel with a certain baron who lived near the town of
Evreux, and Count Pierre was determined to take his followers and attack
the baron's castle; for these private wars were very common in those
days.

But Count Pierre needed money to carry on his little war, and so had
laid a very heavy tax on the peasants of his estate; and Gabriel's
father had been unable to raise the sum of money demanded. For besides
Gabriel, there were several little brothers and sisters in the family,
Jean and Margot and little Guillaume, who must be clothed and fed; and
though the father was honest and hard-working, yet the land of their
little farm was poor, and it was all the family could do to find
themselves enough on which to live.

When peasant Viaud had begged Count Pierre to release him from the tax,
the count, who was hard and unsympathetic, had become angry, and given
orders that the greater part of their little farm should be taken from
them, and he had seized also their little flock of sheep. This was a
grievous loss, for out of the wool that grew on the sheeps' backs,
Gabriel's mother every winter made the warm, homespun clothes for all
the family.

Indeed, Count Pierre had no real right to do all this; but in those
times, when a noble lord chose to be cruel and unjust, the poor
peasants had no way to help matters.

And this was not all of Gabriel's woes; for only a few days after he had
told these things to Brother Stephen, when he went home at night, he
found his mother crying bitterly, and learned that Count Pierre, who was
having some trouble in raising his money, and so had become more
merciless than ever, had that day imprisoned his father at the castle,
and refused to release him unless some of the tax were paid.

This was the hardest blow of all; and though the other children were too
young to understand all that had befallen them, poor Gabriel and his
mother were so distressed that neither slept that night; and the next
morning when the little boy arose, tired out instead of rested by the
long night, he had scarcely the heart to go away to the Abbey, and leave
things so miserable at home. But his mother thought it best for him to
keep on with his work with Brother Stephen, because of the little sum he
earned; and then, too, he felt that he must do his part to help until
King Louis's book was finished. After that, he did not know what he
could do! He did not know how he could best try to take his father's
place and help the family; for, after all, he knew he was only a little
boy, and so things seemed very hopeless!

Indeed the grief and poverty that had come upon them at home made
Gabriel so sad that Brother Stephen was quite heart-broken, too, for he
deeply loved the lad. As he worked, he kept trying all the while to
think of some way to help them; but as the monk had passed all his life
within the walls of the Abbey, he knew but little of the ways of the
outside world; and he had no money of his own, or he would gladly have
paid the tax himself.




CHAPTER VI.

GABRIEL'S PRAYER


MEANTIME, though they worked quietly, they were both very industrious;
and at last one day, late in October, when the first snow was beginning
to fall, Brother Stephen finished the last page of the beautiful book.
He gave a sigh as he laid down his paintbrush; not because he was tired,
but because in his heart he was really sorry to finish his work, for he
knew that then it would soon be taken away, and he hated to part with
it.

As he and Gabriel laid all the pages together in the order in which they
were to go, brother Stephen's heart swelled with pride, and Gabriel
thought he had never seen anything half so lovely!

The text was written in beautiful letters of the lustrous black ink
which Gabriel had made; and at the beginnings of new chapters, wonderful
initial letters glittered in gold and colours till they looked like
little mosaics of precious stones.

Here and there through the text were scattered exquisite miniature
pictures of saints and angels; while as for the borders that enclosed
every page, they wreathed around the written words such lovely garlands
of painted blossoms, that to Gabriel the whole book seemed a marvellous
bouquet of all the sweet flowers he had daily gathered from the Norman
fields, and that Brother Stephen, by the magic of his art, had made
immortal.

Indeed the little boy fairly blinked as he looked at the sparkling
beauty of those pages where the blossoms were to live on, through the
centuries, bright and beautiful and unharmed by wind or rain or the
driving snow, that even then was covering up all the bare frost-smitten
meadows without.

And so Gabriel turned over page after page shining with gold and purple
and rose-colour, till he came to the very last of the text; and then he
saw that there was yet one page more, and on turning over this he read
these words:

"I, Brother Stephen, of the Abbey of St. Martin-de-Bouchage, made this
book; and for every initial letter and picture and border of flowers
that I have herein wrought, I pray the Lord God to have compassion upon
some one of my grievous sins!"

This was written in beautifully, and all around it was painted a
graceful border like braided ribbons of blue.

Now in Brother Stephen's time, when any one finished an especially
beautiful illumination of any part of the Bible, it was quite customary
for the artist to add, at the end, a little prayer. Indeed, no one can
make a really beautiful thing without loving the work; and those
old-time artist-monks took such delight in the flowery pages they
painted, that they felt sure the dear Lord himself could not help but be
pleased to have his words made so beautiful, and that he would so grant
the little prayer at the end of the book, because of the loving labour
that had gone before.

As Gabriel again read over Brother Stephen's last page, it set him to
thinking; and a little later, as he walked home in the frosty dusk, he
thought of it again.

It was true, he said to himself, that all the beautiful written and
painted work on King Louis's book had been done by Brother Stephen's
hands,--and yet,--and yet,--had not he, too, helped? Had he not gathered
the thorny hawthorn, and pricked his fingers, and spent days and days
making the ink? Had he not, week after week, ground the colours and the
gold till his arms ached, and his hands were blistered? Had he not made
the glue, and prepared the parchment, and ruled the lines (and one had
to be _so_ careful not to blot them!), and brought all the flowers for
the borders?

Surely, he thought, though he had not painted any of its lovely pages,
yet he had done his little part to help make the book, and so,
perhaps--perhaps--might not the Lord God feel kindly toward him, too,
and be willing to grant a little prayer to him also?

Now of course Gabriel could have prayed any time and anywhere, and
simply asked for what he wanted. But he had a strong feeling that God
would be much more apt to notice it, if the prayer were beautifully
written out, like Brother Stephen's, and placed in the book itself, on
the making of which he had worked so long and so hard.

Gabriel was very pleased with his idea, and by the time he reached home,
he had planned out just what he wanted to say. He ate his supper of hard
black bread very happily, and when, soon after, he crept into bed and
pulled up his cover of ragged sheepskin, he went to sleep with his head
so full of the work of the past few months, that he dreamed that the
whole world was full of painted books and angels with rose-coloured
wings; that all the meadows of Normandy were covered with gold, and the
flowers fastened on with white of egg and eel-skins; and then, just as
he was getting out his ruler to rule lines over the blue sky, he rubbed
his eyes and woke up; and, finding it was morning, he jumped out of bed,
and hastened to make himself ready for his day's work.

When he reached the Abbey, Brother Stephen was busy binding together the
finished leaves of the book; for the monks had to do not only the
painting, but also the putting together of their books themselves.

After Gabriel had waited on Brother Stephen for awhile, the latter told
him he could have some time to himself, and so he hurried to get out the
little jars of scarlet and blue and black ink, and the bits of parchment
that Brother Stephen had given him. He looked over the parchment
carefully, and at last found one piece from which he could cut a page
that was almost as large as the pages of the book. It was an old piece,
and had some writing on one side, but he knew how to scrape it off
clean; and then taking some of the scarlet ink, he ruled some lines in
the centre of the page, and between these, in the nicest black letters
he knew how to make, he wrote his little prayer. And this is the way it
read:

"I, Gabriel Viaud, am Brother Stephen's colour-grinder; and I have made
the ink for this book, and the glue, and caught the eels, and ground the
gold and colours, and ruled the lines and gathered the flowers for the
borders, and so I pray the Lord God will be kind and let my father out
of prison in Count Pierre's castle, and tell Count Pierre to give us
back our meadow and sheep, for we cannot pay the tax, and mother says we
will starve."

Now in the little prayers that the monks added at the end of a book, it
was the custom to ask only that their sins might be forgiven. But
Gabriel, though he knew he had plenty of sins,--for so the parish priest
of St. Martin's village told all the peasant folk every Sunday,--yet
somehow could not feel nearly so anxious to have them forgiven, as he
was to have his father freed from prison in the castle, and their little
farm and flock restored to them; and so he had decided to word his
prayer the way he did.

It took him some time to write it out, for he took great pains to shape
every letter as perfectly as possible. Nor did he forget that Brother
Stephen had taught him always to make the word God more beautiful than
the others; so he wrote that in scarlet ink, and edged it with scallops
and loops and little dots of blue; and then all around the whole prayer
he made graceful flourishes of the coloured inks. He very much wished
for a bit of gold with which to enrich his work, but gold was too
precious for little boys to practise with, and so Brother Stephen had
not given him any for his own. Nevertheless, when the page was finished,
the artistic effect was very pleasing, and it really was a remarkably
clever piece of work for a little boy to have made.

He did not tell Brother Stephen what he was doing, for he was afraid
that perhaps he might not quite approve of his plan. Not that Gabriel
wished for a moment to do anything that Brother Stephen would not like
him to do, but only that he thought their affairs at home so desperate
that he could not afford to risk losing this means of help;--and then,
too, he felt that the prayer was his own little secret, and he did not
want to tell any one about it anyway.

And so he was greatly relieved that Brother Stephen, who was very much
absorbed in his own work, did not ask him any questions. The monk was
always very kind about helping him in every way possible, but never
insisted on Gabriel's showing him everything, wisely thinking that many
times it was best to let the boy work out his own ideas. So Gabriel said
nothing about his page, but put it carefully away, until he could find
some opportunity to place it in the book itself.

Meantime Brother Stephen worked industriously, and in a few days more he
had quite finished the book. He had strongly bound all his painted pages
together, and put on a cover of violet velvet, which the nuns of a
near-by convent had exquisitely embroidered in pearls and gold. And,
last of all, the cover was fastened with clasps of wrought gold, set
with amethysts. Altogether it was a royal gift, and one worthy of any
queen. Even the Abbot, cold and stately though he usually was,
exclaimed with pleasure when he saw it, and warmly praised Brother
Stephen upon the loveliness of his work.




CHAPTER VII.

THE BOOK GOES TO LADY ANNE


AND it was well that the beautiful book was finished, for the very next
afternoon a nobleman, with several attendants, arrived at the Abbey to
see if the work were done. The nobleman was Count Henri of Lisieux, who
had been sent by King Louis to bear to Lady Anne a precious casket of
jewels as part of his bridal gifts to her; and the count had also
received orders from the king to go to St. Martin's Abbey on his way,
and if the book of hours were finished, to take it along to the Lady
Anne.

Count Henri was greatly pleased when they showed the work to him, and he
said that he knew both King Louis and his bride could not help but be
delighted with it. And then, after it had been duly looked at and
admired, the book was wrapped up in a piece of soft, rich silk and laid
on a shelf in the chapter-house to wait until the next morning, when
Count Henri would take it away. For he had come far, and the Abbot had
invited him to stay overnight in the Abbey before going on with his
journey.

While all this was taking place, and the book was being examined,
Gabriel had been quietly at work in one corner of the chapter-house,
grinding some gold; and when he heard that Count Henri was going away
the next morning, he knew that if he expected to put his own little page
in the book, he must do so some time before he went home that evening;
and he did not quite see how he could manage it.

Late in the afternoon, however, a little before dusk, all the others
left the chapter-house, Brother Stephen to go to his own cell, while the
Abbot took Count Henri out to show him over the Abbey. And just as soon
as they were gone, Gabriel hastily put down the stone mortar in which he
was grinding the gold, and, going over to the work-table, opened the
drawer in which he kept his own things, and took out the page on which
he had written his little prayer.

He then went to the shelf and took down the book. He felt guilty as he
unfolded the silk wrappings, and his hands trembled as he loosened the
golden clasps, and hurriedly slipped in his piece of parchment. He put
it in at the very back of the book, after Brother Stephen's last page.
Then carefully refastening the clasps, and again folding it up in its
silken cover, he replaced the book on the shelf.

Poor Gabriel did not know whether he had done very wrong or not in
taking this liberty with the painted book. He only knew that he could
not bear to have it go away without his little prayer between its
covers; and he thought that now God would surely notice it, as he had
written it as nicely as he knew how, and had placed it next to Brother
Stephen's.

By this time it was growing dark, and so Gabriel left the Abbey and took
his way home. When he reached their forlorn little cottage, he found
only a scanty supper awaiting him, and very early he went to bed; for
they had but little fire and were too poor to afford even a single
candle to burn through the long winter evening.

[Illustration: "_Taking down the book . . . he unwrapped and unclasped
it_"]

As Gabriel lay shivering in his cold little bed, he wondered how long
it would be before God would grant his prayer for help. And then he
wondered if God would be displeased because he had dared to put it in
the beautiful book without asking permission from Brother Stephen or the
Abbot. And the more he thought of the possibility of this, and of all
their other troubles, the more miserable he felt, till at last he sobbed
himself to sleep.

The poor little boy did not know that after he himself had been sleeping
for several hours, Brother Stephen, who had not slept, came out of his
cell in the Abbey, and, carrying in his hand a small lamp, passed softly
down the corridor and into the chapter-house. For Brother Stephen,
like many another true artist who has worked long and lovingly upon some
exquisite thing, found it very hard to part with that which he had made.
He did not expect ever again to see the beautiful book after it left the
Abbey, and so he felt that he must take a farewell look at it all by
himself.

As he entered the chapter-house, he set the lamp on the table; and then
taking down the book and placing it also on the table, he unwrapped and
unclasped it, and seating himself in front of it, looked long and
earnestly at each page as he slowly turned them over, one by one.

When at last he came to the end, and found a loose leaf, he picked it
up in dismay, wondering if his binding could have been so badly done
that one of the pages had already become unfastened. But his look of
dismay changed to bewilderment as he examined the page more closely, and
saw Gabriel's little prayer. He read this over twice, very slowly; and
then, still holding the page in his hand, he sat for a long time with
his head bowed; and once or twice something that looked very like a tear
fell on the stone floor at his feet.

After awhile the lamp began to burn low; and Brother Stephen rising,
gave a tender look to the loose page he had been holding, and then
carefully put it back in the book, taking pains to place it, as nearly
as he could, exactly as Gabriel had done. Then, with a sigh, he shut the
velvet covers, once more fastened the golden clasps, and, replacing the
silken wrappings, laid the book on the shelf, and went back to his cell.

The next morning Count Henri and his escort made ready for their journey
to Bretagne. Count Henri himself placed the precious book in the same
velvet bag which held the casket of jewels for the Lady Anne, and this
bag he hung over his saddle-bow directly in front of him, so that he
could keep close watch and see that no harm befell King Louis's gifts.

And then he and his soldiers mounted their horses, and, taking a
courteous leave of the Abbot and the brotherhood of St. Martin's, they
trotted off along the frosty road.




CHAPTER VIII.

LADY ANNE WRITES TO THE KING


AFTER several days' journey they entered Bretagne, and before long drew
near to the city of Nantes and the castle of Lady Anne. This castle was
very large, and had many towers and gables and little turrets with
sharp-pointed, conical roofs. There was a high wall and a moat all
around it, and as Count Henri approached, he displayed a little banner
given him by King Louis, and made of blue silk embroidered with three
golden lilies.

At the sight of this, the keepers of the drawbridge (who in those days
always had to be very watchful not to admit enemies to their lord's
castle) instantly lowered the bridge, and Count Henri and his guard rode
over and were respectfully received within the gate.

They dismounted in the courtyard, and then, after resting awhile in one
of the rooms of the castle, Count Henri was escorted into the great hall
of state, where Lady Anne was ready to receive him.

This hall was very large and handsome, with a high, arched ceiling, and
walls hung with wonderful old tapestries. Standing about in groups were
numbers of picturesquely dressed pages, ladies-in-waiting, richly clad,
and Breton gentlemen gorgeous in velvets and lace ruffles, for a hundred
of these always attended Lady Anne wherever she went. At one end of the
hall was a dais spread with cloth of gold, and there, in a carved chair,
sat the Lady Anne herself. She wore a beautiful robe of brocaded crimson
velvet, and over her dark hair was a curious, pointed head-dress of
white silk embroidered with pearls and gold thread.

As Count Henri approached, she greeted him very cordially; and then,
kneeling before her, he said:

"My Lady, I have the happiness to deliver to your hands these bridal
gifts which our gracious sovereign, King Louis, did me the honour to
entrust to my care."

And then, as he handed to her the casket of jewels and the silken
package containing the hour book, she replied:

"Sir Count, I thank you for your courtesy in bearing these gifts to me,
and I am well pleased to receive them."

Then summoning a little page, she told him to carry the presents up to
her own chamber, where she might examine them at her leisure.

By and by, Count Henri withdrew, after asking permission to start the
next morning on his return to Paris; for he wished to report to the
king that he had safely accomplished his errand.

And then Lady Anne, having given orders that he and his followers be
hospitably entertained during their stay in the castle, mounted the
great stone staircase, and went to her own room, for she very much
wanted to look at the gifts from King Louis.

These she found on a table where the little page had placed them. The
casket was uncovered, while the book was still wrapped up in the piece
of silk, so that one could not tell just what it was.

[Illustration: "_Began slowly to turn over the pages_"]

Lady Anne opened the casket first, as it happened to be nearest to her;
and she drew in her breath, and her eyes sparkled with pleasure, as she
lifted out a magnificent necklace, and other rich jewels that gleamed
and glittered in the light like blue and crimson fires. She tried on all
the ornaments, and then, after awhile, when she had admired them to her
heart's content, she took up the silk-covered package, and curiously
unwrapped it. When she saw what it contained, however, her face grew
radiant with delight, and--

"Ah!" she exclaimed to herself, "King Louis's gifts are indeed princely,
and this one is the most royal of all!"

For King Louis had been entirely right in thinking nothing would please
the Lady Anne quite so much as a piece of fine illumination.

Still holding the book carefully in her hands, she at once seated
herself in a deep, cushioned chair, and began slowly to turn over the
pages, taking the keenest pleasure, as she did so, in every fresh beauty
on which her eyes fell. When she had gone about half through the book,
she lifted it up to look more closely at an especially beautiful initial
letter, and then, all at once, out fluttered the loose leaf which
Gabriel had put in.

As it fell to the floor, a little page near by hastened to pick it up,
and, bending on one knee, presented it to Lady Anne. At first she
frowned a little, for she thought, as had Brother Stephen, that the
book must have been badly bound. But when she took the leaf in her hand,
to her surprise, she saw that it was different from the others, and that
it had not been bound in with them; and then she read over the writing
very carefully. When she had finished, she sat for some time, just as
Brother Stephen had done, holding the page in her hand, while her face
wore a very tender expression.

Lady Anne was really deeply touched by Gabriel's little prayer, and she
wished greatly that she herself might find a way to help him and his
family out of their trouble.

But the more she thought about it, she realized that she had no
authority over a Norman nobleman, and that no one in France, except the
king, was powerful enough to compel Count Pierre to release the peasant
Viaud from imprisonment.

So going over to a little writing-table, she took out a thin sheet of
parchment, a quaint goose-quill pen, and a small horn full of ink, and
wrote a letter which she addressed to King Louis. Then she took the
loose leaf on which Gabriel's prayer was written, and, folding it in
with her letter, tied the little packet with a thread of scarlet silk
(for no one used envelopes then), and sealed it with some red wax. And
on the wax she pressed a carved ring which she wore, and which left a
print that looked like a tiny tuft of ermine fur encircled by a bit of
knotted cord; for this was Lady Anne's emblem, as it was called, and
King Louis, seeing it, would know at once that the packet came from her.

Then she went down into the great hall of the castle, and sent one of
her Breton gentlemen to bring Count Henri. When the latter entered, she
said to him:

"Sir Count, it would give me great pleasure to keep you longer as my
guest, but if you must return to Paris tomorrow, I will ask you to be my
bearer for a little packet which I am anxious to send to King Louis."

Then, as she handed it to him, she added with a smile, "I give it to
you now, for if you ride early in the morning, I must leave my Breton
gentlemen to do the honours of your stirrup-cup."

(This last was the cup of wine which it was considered polite to offer a
departing guest as he mounted his horse, and was a little ceremony over
which Lady Anne liked to preside herself; that is, when her guests went
away at agreeable hours.)

As Count Henri received the packet from her, he made a very deep bow,
and replied that he would be most happy to serve the Lady Anne in any
way he could, and that he only awaited her command to start at once on
his journey.

"Nay," said Lady Anne, with another little smile, "'tis no affair of
state importance! Only a matter of my own on which I have set my heart.
But I will not hear to your setting forth, until you have sat at my
table and rested overnight in the castle."

To this Count Henri again gallantly bowed his obedience; and then,
before long, Lady Anne led all the company into the great banquet-hall,
where a number of long tables were set out with roasted game, and bread
and wine and the many different cakes and sweetmeats of Bretagne.

The Lady Anne took her place at the head of the longest table of all,
and she placed Count Henri at her right hand. Near them sat many of the
ladies-in-waiting, and Breton gentlemen of the highest rank; while at
the farther end, beyond a great silver saltcellar standing in the middle
of the table, were seated those of less degree.

The dishes were of gold and silver, and Lady Anne herself was waited
upon by two noblemen of Bretagne, for she lived very magnificently, as
was fitting for the bride of King Louis.

When the supper was over, they all went back into the great castle hall,
where bright fires of logs were blazing in the huge fireplaces; and as
they sat in the firelight, they listened to the beautiful songs and
music of two troubadours who had that day chanced to come to the castle,
and who sang so sweetly that it was very late before the company broke
up for the night.

All through the evening, however, in spite of the pleasant
entertainment, Lady Anne, who was very sympathetic, could not help but
think many times of poor little Gabriel, and how cold and hungry and
miserable he must be! She had been much struck, too, with the beautiful
way in which he had written out and ornamented his little prayer, for
she was a good judge of such things; and, as she thought about it, she
determined some day to see the lad herself. Meantime she was very
anxious to help him as soon as possible. Indeed, she felt much happier
when the next morning came, and Count Henri set out for Paris; for then
she knew that her letter and Gabriel's little written page were on their
way to King Louis.

In due time, Count Henri arrived safely at the king's palace, and
delivered the packet from Lady Anne. And when King Louis broke the wax
seal, and read the letter and Gabriel's little prayer, he, too, was
deeply touched. Lady Anne's letter explained to him about finding the
loose page in the beautiful book he had sent her, and asked that he
would see to it that Count Pierre set the boy's father free.

This King Louis at once determined to do, for he was a just and
kind-hearted monarch, and during his reign did much to lighten the taxes
and oppression of the peasant-folk; and, moreover, in this trouble of
Gabriel's father, he now took an especial interest, as it gave him great
pleasure to grant any wish of the Lady Anne, whom he loved deeply.

So that very day he sent for a trusty messenger, and after explaining
things to him, directed him to set out as soon as possible for St.
Martin's Abbey, and there to seek out Brother Stephen and inquire about
the little peasant boy, Gabriel Viaud. And then, if he found everything
to be true that Gabriel had said in his prayer, he was to act according
to further orders which King Louis gave him.




CHAPTER IX.

THE KING'S MESSENGER


NOW while all these things had been going on, poor Gabriel had been
growing more wretchedly unhappy day by day. His people had become poorer
and poorer, and the long, cold winter was upon them. They had almost
given up hope of the release of peasant Viaud from prison, and did not
know where they could get bread or fire to keep them alive through the
bitter cold. Sometimes Gabriel thought with despair of how much he had
hoped from his little prayer! For he was sure, by this time, that God
was angry with him for daring to put it in the beautiful book.

And to add the last touch to his distress, he had been obliged to give
up his work and lessons at the Abbey; for Brother Stephen had been ill
for a time, and unable to paint, and all the other monks had
colour-grinders of their own. So Gabriel, who could not afford to be
idle even for a few days, had been forced to seek employment elsewhere.

The only work he could find was with a leather dresser in the village of
St. Martin's, and though it was very hard and distasteful to him, he
felt that he must keep at it, as he could thus earn a few pennies more
each day than he could as colour-grinder at the Abbey. And yet, with all
his hard toil, the little sum he brought home at night was far from
enough to keep them all from want, to say nothing of paying the tax
which still hung over them; and so every day they became more hopeless
and discouraged.

Indeed, in those times, when a peasant family fell under the displeasure
of their noble lord, it was a bitter misfortune, for there were few
places to which they might turn for help.

And it seemed to Gabriel especially hard to bear all their troubles in
the gracious Christmas season; for it was now past the middle of
December. Always before they had had enough for their happy little
Christmas feast, and some to spare. They had always had their sheaf of
wheat put by for the birds; and for two seasons past Gabriel's father
had let him climb up the tall ladder and fasten the holiday sheaf, bound
with its garland of greens, to the roof of the little peaked and gabled
dovecote that stood on top of a carved pole in the centre of the
farmyard. For every Norman peasant always wishes the birds, too, to be
happy at the joyous Christmas-tide.

And always, every Christmas eve, when Gabriel and his little brothers
and sister had gone to bed, they had set their wooden shoes in a row on
the hearthstone; and then in the morning when they wakened up, they
always found that the blessed Christ-child had been there in the night,
and filled all the little shoes with red apples and nuts.

But this Christmas-time everything was so sad and changed, they were
sure even the Christ-child would forget them. And, day by day, the
little supply of coarse meal for their black bread grew smaller and
smaller, and the snow became deeper, and the wintry winds blew more cold
and cruelly.

Meantime, King Louis's messenger was travelling as fast as he could,
and three days before Christmas he arrived at St. Martin's Abbey. The
Abbot was greatly surprised to see him, and still more so when he asked
if he might speak privately with Brother Stephen. This the Abbot
granted, though he was very anxious to know the messenger's errand; for
he could think of no reason for it, unless there had been something
wrong with King Louis's book. So he was quite uneasy as he saw the
messenger enter Brother Stephen's cell and close the door.

Brother Stephen, too, was at first much surprised when his visitor told
him he had come from King Louis to inquire about a peasant boy by the
name of Gabriel Viaud; though in a moment it flashed through his mind
that Gabriel's prayer had found its way to the palace, and that the
answer was coming.

He said nothing of this, however, but when the messenger asked if he had
had such a boy for colour-grinder, he eagerly answered:

"Yes, and there lives no manlier and sweeter-spirited lad in all
France!"

"Is it true," continued the messenger, "that Count Pierre de Bouchage
hath imprisoned his father for failure to pay a tax, and that the family
are now in sore distress?"

"Yes, that also is true," replied the monk very sadly. And then he said
beseechingly: "But surely King Louis will help them? Surely our
gracious sovereign will not allow such injustice and cruelty?"

Here the messenger answered:

"Nay, our sovereign is indeed a generous monarch! Else had he not been
touched by the little prayer which the peasant lad placed in the book
thou madest for the Lady Anne. Though I dare say thou knewest naught of
it" (here Brother Stephen smiled gently, but said nothing), "yet so the
lad did. And 'twas because of that scrap of parchment falling under the
eyes of King Louis, that I have journeyed all the way from Paris. And,"
he added, as he remembered the heavy snow through which he had ridden,
"it takes a stout heart and a stouter horse to brave thy Norman roads
in December!"

Then he asked Brother Stephen a great many more questions, and inquired
what road to take in order to find Count Pierre's castle, and also the
Viaud cottage. And then when he had satisfied himself about all these
matters, he went back to the great hall of the Abbey, where the Abbot
was slowly pacing the floor, telling his beads as he walked.

The Abbot, though very curious as to the reason of the messenger's
visit, asked him no questions other than if the book for Lady Anne had
been entirely satisfactory; and he felt relieved when the messenger
assured him that so far as he knew both the king and Lady Anne had been
greatly delighted with it. Then, after talking a little while about
Brother Stephen's artistic work, the messenger briefly explained to the
Abbot his errand, and told him that King Louis had ordered him to make
his inquiries about Gabriel as quietly as possible.

As he heard, the Abbot raised his eyebrows and looked somewhat
disapproving, when he realized that the peasant lad who had dared to put
his page into the beautiful book was the same little colour-grinder who
had had the boldness to speak to him, one day in the garden, and ask him
to take off Brother Stephen's chain. However, whatever he may have
thought, he kept it to himself; he treated the messenger with much
courtesy, and, on bidding him good night, invited him to stay as a guest
of the Abbey so long as he chose.

The next morning the messenger rode to the Viaud farm, and, though he
did not go into the cottage, he looked it over carefully and the land
about it; and then he took the highway that led to the castle of Count
Pierre de Bouchage.

When he reached the castle, he asked to see Count Pierre, and so was
taken into the great hall, where the count received him in a very
haughty manner. He became somewhat more polite, however, when he learned
that King Louis had sent the messenger to him; though he looked
decidedly blank when the latter presented to him a letter written on
parchment and fastened with a wax seal stamped with the king's emblem,
which was the print of a little porcupine with the quills on his back
standing up straight, and a crown on top of them.

On seeing this letter, Count Pierre looked blank because the truth was,
that, like many other noble lords at that time, he could read only with
great difficulty. But then the messenger rather expected this, and so he
asked permission to read the parchment to him, and Count Pierre
frowningly assented.

Indeed, though the messenger pretended not to notice his angry looks, he
frowned blacker and blacker as the reading went on. For King Louis
requested in the letter that Count Pierre at once release from prison in
his castle one Jacques Viaud, peasant on his estate. And the king
further said that he himself wished to buy the Viaud cottage and farm,
together with a good-sized piece of ground that adjoined it (the
messenger, in looking it over that morning, had selected a piece of land
which was much better soil than the most of the Viaud farm), and he
stated that for this purpose he had sent by his messenger a certain sum
in gold pieces.

The king mentioned also that he would like to have the flock of sheep,
with the addition of fifty more than had been taken from them, restored
to the Viaud family. And, finally, he said that he desired Count Pierre
to do these things in honour of his king's approaching marriage with the
Lady Anne. For when kings and queens marry, it is generally customary
for them, and for many of the loyal noblemen who are their subjects, to
bestow gifts and benefits upon the poor people, so that every one may be
as happy as possible on the royal wedding-day.

Now Count Pierre really did not care a fig to do honour to King Louis's
marriage, and he was very angry to be asked to release a peasant whom
he had imprisoned, and to restore flocks which he had seized; and
especially was he furious at the request to buy the land, for he did not
wish to sell it, and so to lose control over the peasant-folk who lived
there.

But, nevertheless, in spite of his wrath, the count knew well enough
that he had no real right to do as he had done, and that King Louis knew
it also; and that therefore the very best thing he could do was to obey
the king's wishes at once.

King Louis had made his letter a polite request rather than a command,
because some of his unruly subjects, like Count Pierre, were proud and
difficult to manage, and he wished to settle matters pleasantly and
peaceably, if possible. And so, in asking him to honour the royal
wedding, he gave the count an excuse to yield to his king's wishes,
without hurting his pride so much as if he were obliged to obey a
command.

Count Pierre began to see this, too; and, moreover, he knew that,
notwithstanding the politeness of his letter, the king had plenty of
soldiers, and that he would not hesitate to send them to the Castle de
Bouchage, if necessary, to bring its lord to terms. And he very wisely
reflected that to fight King Louis would be a much more dangerous and
expensive undertaking than the private war with the Baron of Evreux,
which he already had on his hands.

Before yielding to the requests in the letter, however, Count Pierre
wished to satisfy himself that the messenger had correctly read it to
him. And so, haughtily demanding it for a few minutes, he hurried out of
the hall, and sent a page scampering off to bring to him a troubadour;
for one or more of these wandering singers were always to be found in
every nobleman's castle, and the count knew that most of them could
read.

When in a few minutes the page came back, followed, close at his heels,
by a man in motley dress, with a viol hung over his shoulders, Count
Pierre, without waiting to greet the latter, thrust the parchment into
his hands with the gruff command:

"There, fellow! read this letter for me instantly! and if thou makest a
single mistake, I will have thee strangled with the strings of thine own
viol, and tumbled off the highest turret of this castle before set of
sun!"

At this fierce threat, the troubadour began at once to read, taking care
to make no mistakes. Count Pierre listened attentively to every word,
and when the troubadour came to the end, having read it exactly as the
messenger had done, the count angrily snatched it from his hands, and,
swallowing his rage as best he could, went slowly back to the castle
hall.

Then, after a few moments' silence, he very ungraciously and
ill-naturedly gave orders that peasant Viaud be released from prison,
and the sheep sent back. He made a very wry face over the fifty extra
ones, and did not look at all anxious to celebrate King Louis's
approaching wedding.

And then he took the gold pieces which the messenger offered him, and
reluctantly scrawled his name (it was all he could write, and that very
badly) to a piece of parchment which the messenger had ready, and which,
when Count Pierre had signed it, proved that he had sold to King Louis
the land and cottage, and no longer held control over peasant Viaud or
any of his family.

When this was done, the messenger, bidding the nobleman a courteous
farewell, left the latter still very angry and scowling, and, above all,
lost in amazement that King Louis should take all this trouble on
account of a poor, unknown peasant, who had lived all his life on a tiny
farm in Normandy! And as no one ever explained things to him, Count
Pierre never did know how it had all come about, and that, however much
against his will, he was doing his part toward helping answer Gabriel's
little prayer.




CHAPTER X.

GABRIEL'S CHRISTMAS


WHEN the messenger reached the courtyard of the castle, he found peasant
Viaud awaiting him there. The poor man looked very pale and wan from his
imprisonment, and his face pitifully showed what anxiety he had suffered
in thinking about his family left with no one to help them. His clothes,
too, were thin and worn, and he shivered in the cold December wind.
Noticing this, the messenger at once sent word to Count Pierre that he
was sure King Louis would be highly gratified, if, in further honour of
his coming marriage, the count would supply peasant Viaud with a warm
suit of clothes before leaving the castle.

This message was almost too much for Count Pierre to bear, but he did
not dare to refuse. And the messenger smiled to himself when, by and by,
a page came and called Gabriel's father into the castle, from which, in
a little while, he came out, warmly clad, and quite bewildered at all
that was happening to him.

As they set out together for the Viaud cottage, peasant Viaud walking,
and the messenger riding very slowly, the latter explained to him all
about Gabriel's little prayer in the beautiful book, and how Lady Anne
had sent it to King Louis, to whom he owed his release from prison. But
the messenger added that, aside from the lad's father and mother, the
king did not wish any one, not even Gabriel himself, to know how it had
all come about.

For King Louis declared that he himself did not deserve any thanks, but
that the good God had only chosen the Lady Anne and himself and Count
Pierre (though the latter did not know it) as the means of answering
Gabriel's prayer, and of helping the Christ-child bring happiness at the
blessed Christmas-time. For King Louis had not forgotten that the great
day was near at hand.

Of the promised return of the sheep, and the buying of the farm by the
king, the messenger said nothing then; and when they had nearly reached
the cottage, he took leave of peasant Viaud and rode back to the Abbey.
For, having finished the king's errand, before going away, he wanted to
say good-bye to the Abbot and brothers of St. Martin's, and also to get
some of his belongings which he had left at the Abbey.

A few minutes after the messenger had left him, peasant Viaud reached
the cottage and raised the latch,--but then it is no use trying to tell
how surprised and happy they all were! how they hugged and kissed each
other, and laughed and cried!

And then, when the first excitement was over, they began soberly to
wonder what they would do next; for they still feared the displeasure of
Count Pierre, and still did not know where to turn to raise the tax, or
to help their poverty.

"If only he had not taken the sheep," said Gabriel's mother, sadly, "at
least I could have spun warm clothes for all of us!"

But even as she spoke, a loud "Baa! Baa!" sounded from up the road, and
presently along came a large flock of sheep followed by one of Count
Pierre's shepherds, who, without saying a word to any one, skilfully
guided them into the Viaud sheepfold, and there safely penned them in;
then, still without a word, he turned about and went off in the
direction of the castle.

Gabriel's father and mother, who from the cottage window had watched all
this in silent amazement, looked at each other, too bewildered to speak.
Then they went out together to the sheepfold, and peasant Viaud, who
began to realize that this, too, must be part of King Louis's orders,
explained to his wife that which the messenger had told him. When he had
finished, they went back, hand in hand, to the house, their eyes filled
with happy tears, and in their hearts a great tenderness for the little
son who had brought help to them.

[Illustration: "_He passed a little peasant boy_"]

Just before dark, that same afternoon, the king's messenger, having
taken leave of the Abbey folk, once more passed along the highroad. On
his way, he was particular to stop at the Viaud cottage, where he
contrived to have a few minutes' talk alone with Gabriel's mother, and
then wishing her a merry Christmas, he spurred his horse, and rode along
on his journey back to Paris.

As he neared St. Martin's village, he passed a little peasant boy, in a
worn blouse, walking toward the country; and had he known that this same
lad was the Gabriel because of whom, at King Louis's order, he had
ridden all the way from Paris, he would certainly have looked at the boy
with keen interest.

While for his part, had Gabriel known that the strange horseman was a
messenger from the king, and that he had that day played a very
important part in the affairs of the Viaud family,--had he known
this,--he surely would have stood stock-still and opened his eyes wide
with amazement!

But the messenger was absorbed in his own thoughts, and so rode swiftly
on; while poor Gabriel was too sad and wretched to pay much attention to
any one.

As the lad drew near home, however, all at once he fancied he heard the
bleating of sheep. At this he pricked up his ears and began to run, his
heart suddenly beating very fast with excitement!

When he reached the sheepfold, sure enough, there was no mistaking the
sounds within. He opened the door and hurried through the thatched shed,
noting with delight the rows of woolly backs glistening in the twilight,
and then, bursting into the cottage, rushed up to his father and kissed
and hugged him with all his might!

Indeed, Gabriel was so happy and excited that he did not realize that he
was not at all surprised with their good fortune. For miserable as he
had been for weeks, and though he had thought that he had quite
despaired of his prayer being answered, yet deep down in his heart,
without knowing it, all the while he had cherished a strong hope that it
would be.

Nor was Brother Stephen surprised either, when, at barely daybreak the
next morning, before going to his work, Gabriel hurried up to the Abbey
and told him all about it. His face beamed with delight, however, and he
seemed almost as happy over it all as Gabriel himself. He smiled, too,
but said nothing, as the lad wondered over and over what God had done to
Count Pierre, to make him willing to free his father and restore the
sheep! He only said, as he gently patted Gabriel's hair:

"There, there, little one! the good God hath many ways of softening
men's hearts, and never thou mind in what manner he hath chosen to
manage the Count Pierre!"

Just then one of the monks went past the open door, his arms full of
evergreens, and carrying in his hand a pot of the pretty white flowers
that the Norman peasant folk call Christmas roses. Seeing him, Brother
Stephen told Gabriel that he must go and help the brothers trim the
Abbey church for the joyous service of the morrow; and so with another
affectionate little pat, he went out to do his part in arranging the
holiday greens and garlands and tall wax candles, while Gabriel hurried
off to his work in the village.

The little boy was so happy, though, over the things that had happened
at home, that he went about all day in a sort of wondering dream. And
that evening as he went home from his work, very tired, but still
dreaming, the early Christmas-eve stars shone and twinkled so radiantly
over his head and the snow sparkled so brightly under his feet, that he
fairly tingled through and through with the nameless, magic happiness of
the blessed season!

And when he reached home, and sat down next to his father while they ate
their scanty supper, they all felt so glad to be together again that
nobody minded that the pieces of black bread were smaller than ever,
and that when the cold wind blew through the crevices of the cottage
walls, there was not enough fire on the hearth to keep them from
shivering.

Indeed, they were all so much happier than they had been for many weeks,
that when Gabriel and the younger children went to bed, the latter, with
many little gurgles of laughter, arranged their little wooden shoes on
the hearth, just as they had always done on Christmas eve.

For they said to each other, Jean, and Margot, and little Guillaume,
that surely the good God had not forgotten them after all! Had he not
brought back their father and the sheep? And surely he would tell the
little Christ-child to bring them a few Christmas apples and nuts!

Gabriel, however, took no part in their talk, and he did not set his
shoes on the hearth with the others; not that he feared they would be
forgotten, but rather because he thought that he had already asked for
so much and been so generously answered, that he had had his share of
Christmas happiness.

His father was freed from prison, and the flock of sheep, with fifty
more than they had had before, were back in the fold; and though they
were not yet relieved from the tax, nor was their land restored to them,
as he had prayed, yet he felt sure that these, too, would come about in
some way.

And so, considering all these things, he did not quite like to set out
his wooden shoes, and thus invite the Christ-child to give him more; for
he knew the Christ-child had a great many shoes to attend to that night.
So Gabriel, as he made himself ready for bed, pretended not to hear the
chatter of his little brothers and sister, nor to notice what they were
doing.

When peasant Viaud, however, saw them standing their little empty shoes
in front of the meagre fire, he bowed his head on his hands, and the
tears trickled through his fingers. But the mother smiled softly to
herself, as she kissed each of the children and tucked them into their
worn sheepskin covers.

Next morning, at the first peep of day, every one in the cottage was
wide awake; and as soon as they opened their eyes, the children all
jumped out of bed and ran to the hearth with little screams of delight.
For there stood the little wooden shoes,--Gabriel's, too, though he had
not put them there,--and even a larger one apiece for the father and
mother, and the blessed Christ-child had not forgotten one!

Only instead of apples and nuts, they were filled with the most
wonderful bonbons; strange sugar birds, and animals, and candied fruits
such as no peasant child in Normandy had ever before seen; for they
were sweetmeats that no one but the cooks of old Paris knew just how to
make.

And then, as with eager fingers the children drew out these marvels,
down in the toe of each shoe they found a little porcupine of white
sugar with pink quills tipped with a tiny, gilded, candy crown; and last
of all, after each little porcupine, out tumbled a shining yellow gold
piece stamped with the likeness of King Louis.

Even the larger shoes were filled with bonbons, too, and from the toe of
the mother's out dropped a gold piece, like the others, only larger. But
when the father, with clumsy hands, emptied his shoe, instead of a gold
piece, there fell out a small parchment roll fastened with a silken
cord, and showing at one corner a wax seal bearing the print of the
little royal porcupine and crown.

Peasant Viaud gazed at it for a few minutes, in utter bewilderment, and
then handing it to Gabriel, who was standing by, he said:

"Here, child, 'tis a bit of writing, and thou art the only one of us who
can read. See if Brother Stephen's lessons have taken thee far enough to
make out the meaning of this!"

Gabriel took the roll and eagerly untied the cord, and then he carefully
spelled out every word of the writing, which was signed by Count Pierre
de Bouchage.

For it was the very same parchment which King Louis's messenger had
made Count Pierre sign to prove that he had sold to the king, for a
certain sum of gold, the old Viaud farm, together with a piece of good
land adjoining it; and then, at the end of the deed, as the writing was
called, there were a few lines from King Louis himself, which said that
in honour of the blessed Christmas-time the king took pleasure in
presenting to peasant Viaud, and his heirs for ever, everything that he
had bought from Count Pierre.

When Gabriel had finished reading, no one spoke for a little while; it
was so hard to realize the crowning good fortune that had befallen them.
Peasant Viaud looked fairly dazed, and the mother laughed and cried as
she snatched Gabriel to her and kissed him again and again. The younger
children did not understand what it all meant, and so went on munching
their sweetmeats without paying much attention to the little piece of
parchment which Gabriel still held in his hand.

As for Gabriel, he really had had no idea that any one could possibly be
so happy as he himself was at that moment! He had not the least notion
of how it had all come about; he only knew that his heart was fairly
bursting with gratitude to the dear God who had answered his little
prayer so much more joyously and wonderfully than he had ever dared to
dream of!

In his excitement he ran out of the house and hurried into the
sheepfold, where he patted the soft woolly backs of each of the sheep,
and then he raced around the snowy meadows trying to realize that all
these belonged to his family for ever! And that Count Pierre could never
again imprison his father or worry him with heavy taxes!

But the wonders of this wonderful day were not yet over; for presently,
as Gabriel raised his eyes, he saw a strange horseman coming down the
road and looking inquiringly in the direction of the Viaud cottage. Then
seeing the boy standing in the meadow, the horseman called out:

"Ho, lad! Is this the farm of the peasant Viaud?"

"Yes, sir," answered Gabriel, coming up to the road; and then,

"Art thou Gabriel?" asked the rider, stopping and looking curiously at
the little boy.

When again Gabriel wonderingly answered, "Yes, sir," the stranger
dismounted, and, after tying his horse, began deliberately unfastening
the two fat saddle-bags hanging over the back of the latter; and loading
himself with as much as he could carry, he gave Gabriel an armful, too,
and walked toward the cottage.

To the surprised looks and questions of Gabriel's father and mother, he
only said that the Christ-child had been in the castle of the Lady Anne
of Bretagne, and had ordered him to bring certain things to the family
of a Norman peasant boy named Gabriel Viaud.

And such delightful things as they were! There was a great roll of
thick, soft blue cloth, so that they could all be warmly clad without
waiting for the mother to spin the wool from the sheeps' backs. There
were nice little squirrel-fur caps for all the children; there were more
yellow gold pieces; and then there was a large package of the most
enchanting sweetmeats, such as the Bretons make at Christmas-time;
little "magi-cakes," as they were called, each cut in the shape of a
star and covered with spices and sugar; curious old-fashioned candies
and sugared chestnuts; and a pretty basket filled with small round
loaves of the fine, white bread of Bretagne; only instead of the
ordinary baking, these loaves were of a special holiday kind, with
raisins, and nuts, and dried sweet-locust blossoms sprinkled over the
top.

Indeed, perhaps never before had so marvellous a feast been spread under
a peasant roof in Normandy! All were beside themselves with delight; and
while the younger children were dancing round and round in happy
bewilderment, Gabriel snatched up a basket, and hurriedly filling it
with some of the choicest of the sweetmeats, started off at a brisk run
for the Abbey; for he wanted to share some of his Christmas happiness
with Brother Stephen.

When he reached the Abbey, his eyes bright with excitement, and his
cheeks rosy from the crisp cold air, and poured out to Brother Stephen
the story of their fresh good fortune, the monk laughed with delight,
and felt that he, too, was having the happiest Christmas he had ever
known.

And then, by and by, when he took Gabriel by the hand and led him into
the Abbey church for the beautiful Christmas service, as the little boy
knelt on the stone floor and gazed around at the lovely garlands of
green, and the twinkling candles and white Christmas roses on the altar,
half-hidden by the clouds of fragrant incense that floated up from the
censers the little acolytes were swinging to and fro,--as he listened to
the glorious music from the choir, and above all, as he thought of how
the dear God had answered his prayer, the tears sprang to his eyes from
very joy and gratitude! And perhaps that Christmas morning no one in all
France, not even King Louis himself, was quite so happy as the little
peasant boy, Gabriel Viaud.




CHAPTER XI.

THE KING'S ILLUMINATOR


AND to say that he was happier than even King Louis, is saying a very
great deal; for King Louis spent the day most delightfully in Bretagne,
in the castle of his bride to be, the Lady Anne. And then, just after
the holiday season had passed, early in January, he and Lady Anne were
married with great ceremony and splendour.

After the wedding, for three months, the king and queen lingered in
Bretagne; enjoying themselves by night with magnificent entertainments
in the castle, and by day in riding over the frosty fields and in
hunting, of which both of them were very fond. And then in April, when
the first hawthorn buds were beginning to break, they journeyed down to
Paris to live in the king's palace.

Before long, King Louis and Queen Anne decided to make a number of
improvements in this palace; and as they both were great lovers of
beautiful books, they determined, among other things, to build a large
writing-room where they could have skilful illuminators always at work
making lovely books for them.

When this room was finished, and they began to think of whom they would
employ, the first one they spoke of was Brother Stephen, whose exquisite
work on the book of hours had so delighted them. But then, much as they
wished to have him in the palace, they did not think it possible to do
so, as they knew he belonged to the brotherhood of St. Martin's Abbey,
and so of course had taken vows to spend his whole life there.

It chanced, however, soon after this, that King Louis happened to have a
little talk with the messenger he had sent to the Abbey at Christmas
time to see about Gabriel. And this messenger told the king that while
there the Abbot, in speaking to him of Brother Stephen's work, had said
that the latter really wished to leave the brotherhood and go into the
world to paint; and that, though he had refused his request to be freed
from his vows, yet the monk had worked so faithfully at King Louis's
book that he thought he had earned his freedom, and that perhaps he, the
Abbot, had done wrong in forcing him to stay at the Abbey if he wished
to study his art elsewhere.

In short, he had as much as said that if Brother Stephen ever again
asked for his freedom, he would grant it; and this showed that the Abbot
had relented and unbent a great deal more than any one could ever have
believed possible.

When King Louis heard what the messenger told him, he was greatly
pleased; and after talking it over with the queen, he decided to send
the same messenger post-haste back to the Abbey to ask for the services
of Brother Stephen before the Abbot might again change his mind.

Now King Louis was a very liberal monarch, and both he and Queen Anne
liked nothing better than to encourage and help along real artists. And
so they thought that they would supply Brother Stephen with money so
that he could travel about and study and paint as he chose, even if he
preferred always to paint larger pictures rather than to illuminate
books; though they hoped that once in awhile he might spend a little
time in their fine new writing-room.

When the messenger started, they told him to explain all this to Brother
Stephen, and let the latter plan his work in whatever way best pleased
him.

But the queen gave particular orders that, if possible, the messenger
was to bring the peasant boy, Gabriel Viaud, back to the palace with
him; for she thought the lad's work on the page where he had written his
little prayer showed such promise that she wished to see him, and to
have him continue his training in the beautiful art of illumination.

The messenger, having thus received his orders, at once set out again
for Normandy; and he found this second journey much more pleasant than
the one he had made before, through the winter snows. For this time he
rode under tall poplar-trees and between green hedgerows, where the
cuckoos and fieldfares sang all day long. And when, after several days'
travelling, he drew near St. Martin's Abbey, the country on either side
of the road was pink with wild roses and meadowsweet, just as it had
been a year before, when Gabriel used to gather the clusters of
field-flowers for Brother Stephen to paint in the beautiful book.

Indeed, Gabriel still gathered the wild flowers every day, but only
because he loved them; for though, since their better fortunes, he was
again studying and working with Brother Stephen, the latter was then
busy on a long book of monastery rules, with only here and there a
coloured initial letter, and which altogether was not nearly so
interesting as had been the book of hours with its lovely painted
borders.

And so when the messenger reached the Abbey, and made known his errand,
they were both overjoyed at the prospect King Louis offered them.

After talking with the messenger, the Abbot, true to his word, in a
solemn ceremony, freed Brother Stephen from his vows of obedience to
the rules of St. Martin's brotherhood; and then he gave both him and
Gabriel his blessing.

Brother Stephen, who had been too proud to ask a second time for his
freedom, was now delighted that it had all come about in the way it did,
and that he could devote his time to painting anything he chose.

Gabriel, too, was enchanted at the thought of all that he could do and
learn in the king's palace; and though he felt it hard to leave his
home, Queen Anne had kindly made it easier for him by promising that
sometimes he might come back for a little visit.

So in a few days he and Brother Stephen had made all their preparations
to leave; and they set out, Gabriel going with the messenger directly to
King Louis's palace in Paris; while Brother Stephen, taking the bag of
gold pieces which the king and queen had sent for him, travelled to many
of the great cities of Europe, where he studied the wonderful paintings
of the world's most famous masters, and where he himself made many
beautiful pictures. In this way he spent a number of happy months.

And then, just as a great many other people do, who find out that as
soon as they are not compelled to do a certain kind of work, they really
like it very much better than they thought, so, Brother Stephen, being
no longer obliged to illuminate books, all at once discovered that he
really enjoyed painting them more than anything else in the world.

And so it was that, by and by, to the gratification of the king and
queen, and above all to the great delight of Gabriel, he made his way to
the great writing-room of the palace in Paris. And there, in the doing
of his exquisite artistic work, he passed the rest of his long and happy
life.

And through all the years the warm love and friendship between himself
and Gabriel was as sweet and beautiful and as unchanging as any of the
white and golden lilies that they painted in their rarest books. For
Gabriel, too, became one of the finest illuminators of the time, and
his work was much sought for by the great nobles of the land.

Indeed, to this day, many of the wonderful illuminations that were made
in that writing-room are still carefully kept in the great libraries and
museums of France and of Europe. And some time, if ever you have the
happiness to visit one of these, and are there shown some of the painted
books from the palace of King Louis XII. and Queen Anne, if the work is
especially lovely, you may be quite certain that either Brother Stephen,
or Gabriel, or perhaps both of them together, had a hand in its making.

          THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's Gabriel and the Hour Book, by Evaleen Stein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GABRIEL AND THE HOUR BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 27916-8.txt or 27916-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/9/1/27916/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Soap-Making Manual, by E. G. Thomssen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Soap-Making Manual
       A Practical Handbook on the Raw Materials, Their
       Manipulation, Analysis and Control in the Modern Soap Plant.

Author: E. G. Thomssen

Release Date: October 22, 2010 [EBook #34114]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOAP-MAKING MANUAL ***




Produced by David Clarke, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







Soap-Making Manual

A practical handbook on the raw materials, their manipulation, analysis
and control in the modern soap plant.

By

_E. G. Thomssen, Ph. D._

ILLUSTRATED


NEW YORK

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

EIGHT WARREN STREET

1922

COPYRIGHT 1922

BY

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

Printed in the United States of America

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note:

This is a series of articles collected into a book. There are
differences in spelling and punctuation in the different chapters (e.g.
cocoanut in one chapter and coconut in another). These differences were
left in the text as they appeared.

For Text: A word surrounded by a tilde such as ~this~ signifies that
the word is bolded in the text. A word surrounded by underscores like
_this_ signifies the word is italics in the text.

For numbers and equations: Parentheses have been added to clarify
fractions. Underscores before bracketed numbers in equations denote a
subscript.

Minor typos have been corrected and footnotes moved to the end of the
chapters.

       *       *       *       *       *


PREFATORY NOTE.


The material contained in this work appeared several years ago in serial
form in the American Perfumer and Essential Oil Review. Owing to the
numerous requests received, it has been decided to now place before
those interested, these articles in book form. While it is true that the
works pertaining to the soapmaking industry are reasonably plentiful,
books are quite rare, however, which, in a brief volume, will clearly
outline the processes employed together with the necessary methods of
analyses from a purely practical standpoint. In the work presented the
author has attempted to briefly, clearly, and fully explain the
manufacture of soap in such language that it might be understood by all
those interested in this industry. In many cases the smaller plants find
it necessary to dispense with the services of a chemist, so that it is
necessary for the soapmaker to make his own tests. The tests outlined,
therefore, are given as simple as possible to meet this condition. The
formulae submitted are authentic, and in many cases are now being used
in soapmaking.

In taking up the industry for survey it has been thought desirable to
first mention and describe the raw materials used; second, to outline
the processes of manufacture; third, to classify the methods and
illustrate by formulae the composition of various soaps together with
their mode of manufacture; fourth, to enumerate the various methods of
glycerine recovery, including the processes of saponification, and,
fifth, to give the most important analytical methods which are of value
to control the process of manufacture and to determine the purity and
fitness of the raw material entering into it.

It is not the intention of the author to go into great detail in this
work, nor to outline to any great extent the theoretical side of the
subject, but rather to make the work as brief as possible, keeping the
practical side of the subject before him and not going into concise
descriptions of machinery as is very usual in works on this subject.
Illustrations are merely added to show typical kinds of machinery used.

The author wishes to take this opportunity of thanking Messrs. L. S.
Levy and E. W. Drew for the reading of proof, and Mr. C. W. Aiken of the
Houchin-Aiken Co., for his aid in making the illustrations a success, as
well as others who have contributed in the compiling of the formulae for
various soaps. He trusts that this work may prove of value to those
engaged in soap manufacture.

E. G. T.

January, 1922




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.                                                      Page.

RAW MATERIALS USED IN SOAP MAKING                                1-30

  1. Soap Defined                                                   1

  2. Oils and Fats                                                1-2

  3. Saponification Defined                                       2-3

  4. Fats and Oils Used in Soap Manufacture                       3-4
    Fullers' Earth Process for Bleaching Tallow                   4-6
    Method for Further Improvement of Color in Tallow               6
    Vegetable Oils                                                6-9
    Chrome Bleaching of Palm Oil                                 9-12
    Air Bleaching of Palm Oil                                   12-16

  5. Rancidity of Oils and Fats                                 16-18
    Prevention of Rancidity                                        18

  6. Chemical Constants of Oils and Fats                        18-19

  7. Oil Hardening or Hydrogenating                             19-21

  8. Grease                                                     21-22

  9. Rosin (Colophony, Yellow Rosin, Resina)                    22-23

  10. Rosin Saponification                                      23-24

  11. Naphthenic Acids                                          24-25

  12. Alkalis                                                   25-26
    Caustic Soda                                                   26
    Caustic Potash                                              26-28
    Sodium Carbonate (Soda Ash)                                 28-29
    Potassium Carbonate                                            29

  13. Additional Material Used in Soap Making                   29-30


CHAPTER II.

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT OF A SOAP PLANT                      31-34


CHAPTER III.

CLASSIFICATION OF SOAP MAKING METHODS                           35-46

  1. Full Boiled Soaps                                          36-42

  2. Cold Process                                               43-44

  3. Carbonate Saponification                                   45-46


CHAPTER IV.

CLASSIFICATION OF SOAPS                                        47-104

  1. Laundry Soap                                                  48
    Semi-Boiled Laundry Soap                                    49-50
    Settled Rosin Soap                                          50-54

  2. Chip Soap                                                  54-55
    Cold Made Chip Soap                                         55-56
    Unfilled Chip Soap                                             56

  3. Soap Powders                                               56-59
    Light Powders                                               60-61

  4. Scouring Powders                                              61

  5. Scouring Soap                                              61-62

  6. Floating Soap                                              62-65

  7. Toilet Soap                                                65-68
    Cheaper Toilet Soaps                                        68-69
    Run and Glued-up Soaps                                      69-71
    Curd Soap                                                   71-72
    Cold Made Toilet Soaps                                      72-73
    Perfuming and Coloring Toilet Soaps                         73-75
    Coloring Soap                                               75-76

  8. Medicinal Soaps                                            76-77
    Sulphur Soaps                                                  77
    Tar Soap                                                       77
    Soaps Containing Phenols                                    77-78
    Peroxide Soap                                                  78
    Mercury Soaps                                                  78
    Less Important Medicinal Soaps                              78-79

  9. Castile Soap                                               79-81

  10. Eschweger Soap                                            81-82

  11. Transparent Soap                                          82-84
    Cold Made Transparent Soap                                  84-87

  12. Shaving Soaps                                             87-90
    Shaving Powder                                                 90
    Shaving Cream                                               90-93

  13. Pumice or Sand Soaps                                      93-94

  14. Liquid Soaps                                              94-95

  15. Use of Hardened Oils in Toilet Soaps                      96-98

  16. Textile Soaps                                                98
    Scouring and Fulling Soaps for Wool                        98-100
    Wool Thrower's Soap                                       100-101
    Worsted Finishing Soaps                                       101
    Soaps Used in the Silk Industry                           101-103
    Soaps Used for Cotton Goods                               103-104

  17. Sulphonated Oils                                        104-105


CHAPTER V.

GLYCERINE RECOVERY                                            105-126

  1. Methods of Saponification                                105-106
     Recovery of Glycerine from Spent Lye                     106-113
     Twitchell Process                                        113-118
     Autoclave Saponification                                     118
     Lime Saponification                                      118-120
     Acid Saponification                                      120-121
     Aqueous Saponification                                       121
     Splitting Fats with Ferments                             121-123
     Krebitz Process                                          123-125

  2. Distillation of Fatty Acids                              125-126


CHAPTER VI.

ANALYTICAL METHODS                                            127-164

  1. Analysis of Oils and Fats                                    128
     Free Fatty Acids                                         128-130
     Moisture                                                     130
     Titer                                                    130-132
     Determination of Unsaponifiable Matter                   132-133
     Test for Color of Soap                                   133-134
     Testing of Alkalis Used in Soap Making                   134-137

  2. Soap Analysis                                            137-138
     Moisture                                                 138-139
     Free Alkali or Acid                                      139-142
     Insoluble Matter                                             143
     Starch and Gelatine                                      143-144
     Total Fatty and Resin Acids                                  144
     Determination of Rosin                                   144-147
     Total Alkali                                             147-148
     Unsaponifiable Matter                                        148
     Silica and Silicates                                     148-149
     Glycerine in Soap                                        149-150
     Sugar in Soap                                                150

  3. Glycerine Analysis                                       150-151
     Sampling                                                     151
     Analysis                                                 151-154
     Acetin Process for the Determination of Glycerol         155-156
     The Method                                               156-159
     Ways of Calculating Actual Glycerol Contents             159-160
     Bichromate Process for Glycerol Determination
       Reagents Required                                      160-161
     The Method                                               161-162
     Sampling Crude Glycerine                                 162-164


CHAPTER VII

STANDARD METHODS FOR THE SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS OF
COMMERCIAL FATS AND OILS                                      165-195

  1. Scope, Applicability and Limitations of the Methods      165-166
    Scope                                                         165
    Applicability                                                 166
    Limitations                                                   166
    Sampling                                                  166-169
    Tank Cars                                                 166-167
    Barrels, Tierces, Casks, Drums, and Other Packages            168

  2. Analysis                                                 169-183
    Sample                                                        169
    Moisture and Volatile Matter                              170-172
    Insoluble Impurities                                      172-173
    Soluble Mineral Matter                                        173
    Free Fatty Acids                                              174
    Titer                                                     174-175
    Unsaponifiable Matter                                     176-177
    Iodine Number-Wijs Method                                 177-181
    Saponification Number (Koettstorfer Number)                   181
    Melting Point                                             181-182
    Cloud Test                                                182-184

  3. Notes of the Above Methods                               184-196
    Sampling                                                      183
    Moisture and Volatile Matter                              184-187
    Insoluble Impurities                                          187
    Soluble Mineral Matter                                    187-188
    Free Fatty Acid                                           188-189
    Titer                                                         189
    Unsaponified Matter                                       190-193
    Melting Point                                             193-196

Plant and Machinery                                           198-219
    Illustrations of Machinery and Layouts of the Plant
    of a Modern Soap Making Establishment                     198-219

Appendix                                                      219-237

    Useful Tables

Index                                                             239




CHAPTER I

Raw Materials Used in Soap Making.


Soap is ordinarily thought of as the common cleansing agent well known
to everyone. In a general and strictly chemical sense this term is
applied to the salts of the non-volatile fatty acids. These salts are
not only those formed by the alkali metals, sodium and potassium, but
also those formed by the heavy metals and alkaline earths. Thus we have
the insoluble soaps of lime and magnesia formed when we attempt to wash
in "hard water"; again aluminum soaps are used extensively in polishing
materials and to thicken lubricating oils; ammonia or "benzine" soaps
are employed among the dry cleaners. Commonly, however, when we speak of
soap we limit it to the sodium or potassium salt of a higher fatty acid.

It is very generally known that soap is made by combining a fat or oil
with a water solution of sodium hydroxide (caustic soda lye), or
potassium hydroxide (caustic potash). Sodium soaps are always harder
than potassium soaps, provided the same fat or oil is used in both
cases.

The detergent properties of soap are due to the fact that it acts as an
alkali regulator, that is, when water comes into contact with soap, it
undergoes what is called hydrolytic dissociation. This means that it is
broken down by water into other substances. Just what these substances
are is subject to controversy, though it is presumed caustic alkali and
the acid alkali salt of the fatty acids are formed.


OILS AND FATS.

There is no sharp distinction between fat and oil. By "oil" the layman
has the impression of a liquid which at warm temperature will flow as a
slippery, lubricating, viscous fluid; by "fat" he understands a greasy,
solid substance unctuous to the touch. It thus becomes necessary to
differentiate the oils and fats used in the manufacture of soap.

Inasmuch as a soap is the alkali salt of a fatty acid, the oil or fat
from which soap is made must have as a constituent part, these fatty
acids. Hydrocarbon oils or paraffines, included in the term "oil," are
thus useless in the process of soap-making, as far as entering into
chemical combination with the caustic alkalis is concerned. The oils and
fats which form soap are those which are a combination of fatty acids
and glycerine, the glycerine being obtained as a by-product to the
soap-making industry.


NATURE OF A FAT OR OIL USED IN SOAP MANUFACTURE.

Glycerine, being a trihydric alcohol, has three atoms of hydrogen which
are replaceable by three univalent radicals of the higher members of the
fatty acids, _e. g._,

                OH                       OR
    C_{3} H_{5} OH + 3 ROH = C_{3} H_{5} OR + 3 H_{2}O
                OH                       OR

Glycerine plus 3 Fatty Alcohols equals Fat or Oil plus 3 Water.

Thus three fatty acid radicals combine with one glycerine to form a true
neutral oil or fat which are called triglycerides. The fatty acids which
most commonly enter into combination of fats and oils are lauric,
myristic, palmitic, stearic and oleic acids and form the neutral oils or
triglycerides derived from these, _e. g._, stearin, palmatin, olein.
Mono and diglycerides are also present in fats.


SAPONIFICATION DEFINED.

When a fat or oil enters into chemical combination with one of the
caustic hydrates in the presence of water, the process is called
"saponification" and the new compounds formed are soap and glycerine,
thus:

               OR                       OH
    C_{3}H_{5} OR + 3 NaOH = C_{3}H_{5} OH + 3 NaOR
               OR                       OH

Fat or Oil plus 3 Sodium Hydrate equals Glycerine plus 3 Soap.

It is by this reaction almost all of the soap used today is made.

There are also other means of saponification, as, the hydrolysis of an
oil or fat by the action of hydrochloric or sulfuric acid, by autoclave
and by ferments or enzymes. By these latter processes the fatty acids
and glycerine are obtained directly, no soap being formed.


FATS AND OILS USED IN SOAP MANUFACTURE.

The various and most important oils and fats used in the manufacture of
soap are, tallow, cocoanut oil, palm oil, olive oil, poppy oil, sesame
oil, soya bean oil, cotton-seed oil, corn oil and the various greases.
Besides these the fatty acids, stearic, red oil (oleic acid) are more or
less extensively used. These oils, fats and fatty acids, while they vary
from time to time and to some extent as to their color, odor and
consistency, can readily be distinguished by various physical and
chemical constants.

Much can be learned by one, who through continued acquaintance with
these oils has thoroughly familiarized himself with the indications of a
good or bad oil, by taste, smell, feel and appearance. It is, however,
not well for the manufacturer in purchasing to depend entirely upon
these simpler tests. Since he is interested in the yield of glycerine,
the largest possible yield of soap per pound of soap stock and the
general body and appearance of the finished product, the chemical tests
upon which these depend should be made. Those especially important are
the acid value, percentage unsaponifiable matter and titer test.

A short description of the various oils and fats mentioned is sufficient
for their use in the soap industry.

_Tallow_ is the name given to the fat extracted from the solid fat or
"suet" of cattle, sheep or horses. The quality varies greatly, depending
upon the seasons of the year, the food and age of the animal and the
method of rendering. It comes to the market under the distinction of
edible and inedible, a further distinction being made in commerce as
beef tallow, mutton tallow or horse tallow. The better quality is white
and bleaches whiter upon exposure to air and light, though it usually
has a yellowish tint, a well defined grain and a clean odor. It consists
chiefly of stearin, palmitin and olein. Tallow is by far the most
extensively used and important fat in the making of soap.

In the manufacture of soaps for toilet purposes, it is usually necessary
to produce as white a product as possible. In order to do this it often
is necessary to bleach the tallow before saponification. The method
usually employed is the Fuller's Earth process.


FULLER'S EARTH PROCESS FOR BLEACHING TALLOW.

From one to two tons of tallow are melted out into the bleaching tank.
This tank is jacketed, made of iron and provided with a good agitator
designed to stir up sediment or a coil provided with tangential downward
opening perforations and a draw-off cock at the bottom. The coil is the
far simpler arrangement, more cleanly and less likely to cause trouble.
By this arrangement compressed air which is really essential in the
utilization of the press (see later) is utilized for agitation. A dry
steam coil in an ordinary tank may be employed in place of a jacketed
tank, which lessens the cost of installation.

The tallow in the bleaching tank is heated to 180° F. (82° C.) and ten
pounds of dry salt per ton of fat used added and thoroughly mixed by
agitation. This addition coagulates any albumen and dehydrates the fat.
The whole mass is allowed to settle over night where possible, or for at
least five hours. Any brine which has separated is drawn off from the
bottom and the temperature of the fat is then raised to 160° F. (71° C).

Five per cent. of the weight of the tallow operated upon, of dry
Fuller's earth is now added and the whole mass agitated from twenty to
thirty minutes.

The new bleached fat, containing the Fuller's earth is pumped directly
to a previously heated filter press and the issuing clear oil run
directly to the soap kettle.

One of the difficulties experienced in the process is the heating of the
press to a temperature sufficient to prevent solidification of the fat
without raising the press to too great a temperature. To overcome this
the first plate is heated by wet steam. Air delivered from a blower and
heated by passage through a series of coils raised to a high temperature
by external application of heat (super-heated steam) is then substituted
for the steam. The moisture produced by the condensation of the steam is
vaporized by the hot air and carried on gradually to each succeeding
plate where it again condenses and vaporizes. In this way the small
quantity of water is carried through the entire press, raising its
temperature to 80°-100° C. This temperature is subsequently maintained
by the passage of hot air. By this method of heating the poor
conductivity of hot air is overcome through the intermediary action of a
liquid vapor and the latent heat of steam is utilized to obtain the
initial rise in temperature. To heat a small press economically where
conditions are such that a large output is not required the entire
press may be encased in a small wooden house which can be heated by
steam coils. The cake in the press is heated for some time after the
filtration is complete to assist drainage. After such treatment the cake
should contain approximately 15 per cent. fat and 25 per cent. water.
The cake is now removed from the press and transferred to a small tank
where it is treated with sufficient caustic soda to convert the fat
content into soap.

Saturated brine is then added to salt out the soap, the Fuller's earth
is allowed to settle to the bottom of the tank and the soap which
solidifies after a short time is skimmed off to be used in a cheap soap
where color is not important. The liquor underneath may also be run off
without disturbing the sediment to be used in graining a similar cheap
soap. The waste Fuller's earth contains about 0.1 to 0.3 per cent. of
fat.


METHOD FOR FURTHER IMPROVEMENT OF COLOR.

A further improvement of the color of the tallow may be obtained by
freeing it from a portion of its free fatty acids, either with or
without previous Fuller's earth bleaching.

To carry out this process the melted fat is allowed to settle and as
much water as possible taken off. The temperature is then raised to 160°
F. with dry steam and enough saturated solution of soda ash added to
remove 0.5 per cent. of the free fatty acids, while agitating the mass
thoroughly mechanically or by air. The agitation is continued ten
minutes, the whole allowed to settle for two hours and the foots drawn
off. The soap thus formed entangles a large proportion of the impurities
of the fat.


VEGETABLE OILS.

_Cocoanut Oil_, as the name implies, is obtained from the fruit of the
cocoanut palm. This oil is a solid, white fat at ordinary temperature,
having a bland taste and a characteristic odor. It is rarely
adulterated and is very readily saponified. In recent years the price of
this oil has increased materially because cocoanut oil is now being used
extensively for edible purposes, especially in the making of
oleomargarine. Present indications are that shortly very little high
grade oil will be employed for soap manufacture since the demand for
oleomargarine is constantly increasing and since new methods of refining
the oil for this purpose are constantly being devised.

The oil is found in the market under three different grades: (1) Cochin
cocoanut oil, the choicest oil comes from Cochin (Malabar). This
product, being more carefully cultivated and refined than the other
grades, is whiter, cleaner and contains a smaller percentage of free
acid. (2) Ceylon cocoanut oil, coming chiefly from Ceylon, is usually of
a yellowish tint and more acrid in odor than Cochin oil. (3) Continental
cocoanut oil (Copra, Freudenberg) is obtained from the dried kernels,
the copra, which are shipped to Europe in large quantities, where the
oil is extracted. These dried kernels yield 60 to 70 per cent oil. This
product is generally superior to the Ceylon oil and may be used as a
very satisfactory substitute for Cochin oil, in soap manufacture,
provided it is low in free acid and of good color. The writer has
employed it satisfactorily in the whitest and finest of toilet soaps
without being able to distinguish any disadvantage to the Cochin oil.
Since continental oil is usually cheaper than Cochin oil, it is
advisable to use it, as occasion permits.

Cocoanut oil is used extensively in toilet soap making, usually in
connection with tallow. When used alone the soap made from this oil
forms a lather, which comes up rapidly but which is fluffy and dries
quickly. A pure tallow soap lathers very much slower but produces a more
lasting lather. Thus the advantage of using cocoanut oil in soap is
seen. It is further used in making a cocoanut oil soap by the cold
process also for "fake" or filled soaps. The fatty acid content readily
starts the saponification which takes place easily with a strong lye
(25°-35° B.). Where large quantities of the oil are saponified care must
be exercised as the soap formed suddenly rises or puffs up and may boil
over. Cocoanut oil soap takes up large quantities of water, cases having
been cited where a 500 per cent. yield has been obtained. This water of
course dries out again upon exposure to the air. The soap is harsh to
the skin, develops rancidity and darkens readily.

_Palm Kernel Oil_, which is obtained from the kernels of the palm tree
of West Africa, is used in soap making to replace cocoanut oil where the
lower price warrants its use. It resembles cocoanut oil in respect to
saponification and in forming a very similar soap. Kernel oil is white
in color, has a pleasant nutty odor when fresh, but rapidly develops
free acid, which runs to a high percentage.

_Palm Oil_ is produced from the fruit of the several species of the palm
tree on the western coast of Africa generally, but also in the
Philippines. The fresh oil has a deep orange yellow tint not destroyed
by saponification, a sweetish taste and an odor of orris root or violet
which is also imparted to soap made from it. The methods by which the
natives obtain the oil are crude and depend upon a fermentation, or
putrefaction. Large quantities are said to be wasted because of this
fact. The oil contains impurities in the form of fermentable fibre and
albuminous matter, and consequently develops free fatty acid rapidly.
Samples tested for free acid have been found to have hydrolized
completely and one seldom obtains an oil with low acid content. Because
of this high percentage of free fatty acid, the glycerine yield is
small, though the neutral oil should produce approximately 12 per cent.
glycerine. Some writers claim that glycerine exists in the free state
in palm oil. The writer has washed large quantities of the oil and
analyzed the wash water for glycerine. The results showed that the
amount present did not merit its recovery. Most soap makers do not
attempt to recover the glycerine from this oil, when used alone for soap
manufacture.

There are several grades of palm oil in commerce, but in toilet soap
making it is advisable to utilize only Lagos palm oil, which is the best
grade. Where it is desired to maintain the color of the soap this oil
produces, a small quantity of the lower or "brass" grade of palm oil may
be used, as the soap made from the better grades of oil gradually
bleaches and loses its orange yellow color.

Palm oil produces a crumbly soap which cannot readily be milled and is
termed "short." When used with tallow and cocoanut oil, or 20 to 25 per
cent. cocoanut oil, it produces a very satisfactory toilet soap. In the
saponification of palm oil it is not advisable to combine it with tallow
in the kettle, as the two do not readily mix.

Since the finished soap has conveyed to it the orange color of the oil,
the oil is bleached before saponification. Oxidation readily destroys
the coloring matter, while heat and light assist materially. The methods
generally employed are by the use of oxygen developed by bichromates and
hydrochloric acid and the direct bleaching through the agency of the
oxygen of the air.


CHROME BLEACHING OF PALM OIL.

The chrome process of bleaching palm oil is more rapid and the oxygen
thus derived being more active will bleach oils which air alone cannot.
It depends upon the reaction:

    Na_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} + 8HCl = Cr_{2}Cl_{6} + 2NaCl + 7O.

in which the oxygen is the active principle. In practice it is found
necessary to use an excess of acid over that theoretically indicated.

For the best results an oil should be chosen containing under 2 per
cent. impurities and a low percentage of free fatty acids. Lagos oil is
best adapted to these requirements. The oil is melted by open steam from
a jet introduced through the bung, the melted oil and condensed water
running to the store tank through two sieves (about 1/8 inch mesh) to
remove the fibrous material and gross impurities. The oil thus obtained
contains fine earthy and fibrous material and vegetable albuminous
matter which should be removed, as far as possible, since chemicals are
wasted in their oxidation and they retard the bleaching. This is best
done by boiling the oil for one hour with wet steam and 10 per cent.
solution of common salt (2 per cent. dry salt on weight of oil used) in
a lead-lined or wooden tank. After settling over night the brine and
impurities are removed by running from a cock at the bottom of the vat
and the oil is run out into the bleaching tank through an oil cock,
situated about seven inches from the bottom.

The bleaching tank is a lead-lined iron tank of the approximate
dimensions of 4 feet deep, 4 feet long and 3-1/2 feet wide, holding
about 1-1/2 tons. The charge is one ton. A leaden outlet pipe is fixed
at the bottom, to which is attached a rubber tube closed by a screw
clip. A plug also is fitted into the lead outlet pipe from above. Seven
inches above the lower outlet is affixed another tap through which the
oil is drawn off.

The tank is further equipped with a wet steam coil and a coil arranged
to allow thorough air agitation, both coils being of lead. A good
arrangement is to use one coil to deliver either air or steam. These
coils should extend as nearly as possible over the entire bottom of the
tank and have a number of small downward perforations, so as to spread
the agitation throughout the mass.

The temperature of the oil is reduced by passing in air to 110° F. and
40 pounds of fine common salt per ton added through a sieve. About
one-half of the acid (40 pounds of concentrated commercial hydrochloric
acid) is now poured in and this is followed by the sodium bichromate in
concentrated solution, previously prepared in a small lead vat or
earthen vessel by dissolving 17 pounds of bichromate in 45 pounds
commercial hydrochloric acid. This solution should be added slowly and
should occupy three hours, the whole mass being thoroughly agitated with
air during the addition and for one hour after the last of the bleaching
mixture has been introduced. The whole mixture is now allowed to settle
for one hour and the exhausted chrome liquors are then run off from the
lower pipe to a waste tank. About 40 gallons of water are now run into
the bleached oil and the temperature raised by open steam to 150° to
160° F. The mass is then allowed to settle over night.

One such wash is sufficient to remove the spent chrome liquor
completely, provided ample time is allowed for settling. A number of
washings given successively with short periods of settling do not remove
the chrome liquors effectually. The success of the operation depends
entirely upon the completeness of settling.

The wash water is drawn off as before and the clear oil run to storage
tanks or to the soap kettle through the upper oil cock.

The waste liquors are boiled with wet steam and the oil skimmed from the
surface, after which the liquors are run out through an oil trap.

By following the above instructions carefully it is possible to bleach
one ton of palm oil with 17 pounds of bichromate of soda and 85 pounds
hydrochloric acid.

The spent liquors should be a bright green color. Should they be of a
yellow or brownish shade insufficient acid has been allowed and more
must be added to render the whole of the oxygen available.

If low grade oils are being treated more chrome will be necessary, the
amount being best judged by conducting the operation as usual and after
the addition of the bichromate, removing a sample of the oil, washing
the sample and noting the color of a rapidly cooled sample.

A little practice will enable the operator to judge the correspondence
between the color to be removed and the amount of bleaching mixture to
be added.

To obtain success with this process the method of working given must be
adhered to even in the _smallest detail_. This applies to the
temperature at which each operation is carried out particularly.


AIR BLEACHING OF PALM OIL.

The method of conducting this process is identical with the chrome
process to the point where the hydrochloric acid is to be added to the
oil. In this method no acid or chrome is necessary, as the active
bleaching agent is the oxygen of the air.

The equipment is similar to that of the former process, except that a
wooden tank in which no iron is exposed will suffice to bleach the oil
in. The process depends in rapidity upon the amount of air blown through
the oil and its even distribution. Iron should not be present or exposed
to the oil during bleaching, as it retards the process considerably.

After the impurities have been removed, as outlined under the chrome
process, the temperature of the oil is raised by open steam to boiling.
The steam is then shut off and air allowed to blow through the oil until
it is completely bleached, the temperature being maintained above 150°
F. by occasionally passing in steam. Usually a ton of oil is readily and
completely bleached after the air has been passed through it for 18 to
20 hours, provided the oil is thoroughly agitated by a sufficient flow
of air.

If the oil has been allowed to settle over night, it is advisable to run
off the condensed water and impurities by the lower cock before
agitating again the second day.

When the oil has been bleached to the desired color, which can be
determined by removing a sample and cooling, the mass is allowed to
settle, the water run off to a waste tank from which any oil carried
along may be skimmed off and the supernatant clear oil run to the
storage or soap kettle.

In bleaching by this process, while the process consumes more time and
is not as efficient in bleaching the lower grade oils, the cost of
bleaching is less and with a good oil success is more probable, as there
is no possibility of any of the chrome liquors being present in the oil.
These give the bleached oil a green tint when the chrome method is
improperly conducted and they are not removed.

Instead of blowing the air through it, the heater oil may be brought
into contact with the air, either by a paddle wheel arrangement, which,
in constantly turning, brings the oil into contact with the air, or by
pumping the heated oil into an elevated vessel, pierced with numerous
fine holes from which the oil continuously flows back into the vessel
from which the oil is pumped. While in these methods air, light and heat
act simultaneously in the bleaching of the oil, the equipment required
is too cumbersome to be practical.

Recent investigations[1] in bleaching palm oil by oxygen have shown that
not only the coloring matter but the oil itself was affected. In
bleaching palm oil for 30 hours with air the free fatty acid content
rose and titer decreased considerably.

_Olive Oil_, which comes from the fruit of the olive trees, varies
greatly in quality, according to the method by which it is obtained and
according to the tree bearing the fruit. Three hundred varieties are
known in Italy alone. Since the larger portion of olive oil is used for
edible purposes, a lower grade, denatured oil, denatured because of the
tariff, is used for soap manufacture in this country. The oil varies in
color from pale green to golden yellow. The percentage of free acid in
this oil varies greatly, though the oil does not turn rancid easily. It
is used mainly in the manufacture of white castile soap.

Olive oil foots, which is the oil extracted by solvents after the better
oil is expressed, finds its use in soap making mostly in textile soaps
for washing and dyeing silks and in the production of green castile
soaps.

Other oils, as poppy seed oil, sesame oil, cottonseed oil, rape oil,
peanut (arachis) oil, are used as adulterants for olive oil, also as
substitutes in the manufacture of castile soap, since they are cheaper
than olive oil.

_Cottonseed Oil_ is largely used in the manufacture of floating and
laundry soaps. It may be used for toilet soaps where a white color is
not desired, as yellow spots appear on a finished soap in which it has
been used after having been in stock a short time.

_Corn Oil and Soya Bean Oil_ are also used to a slight extent in the
manufacture of toilet soaps, although the oils form a soap of very
little body. Their soaps also spot yellow on aging.

Corn oil finds its greatest use in the manufacture of soap for washing
automobiles. It is further employed for the manufacture of cheap liquid
soaps.

_Fatty Acids_ are also used extensively in soap manufacture. While the
soap manufacturer prefers to use a neutral oil or fat, since from these
the by-product glycerine is obtained, circumstances arise where it is
an advantage to use the free fatty acids. Red oil (oleic acid, elaine)
and stearic acid are the two fatty acids most generally bought for soap
making. In plants using the Twitchell process, which consists in
splitting the neutral fats and oils into fatty acids and glycerine by
dilute sulphuric acid and producing their final separation by the use of
so-called aromatic sulphonic acids, these fatty acids consisting of a
mixture of oleic, stearic, palmitic acids, etc., are used directly after
having been purified by distillation, the glycerine being obtained from
evaporating the wash water.

Oleic acid (red oil) and stearic acid are obtained usually by the
saponification of oils, fats and greases by acid, lime or water under
pressure or Twitchelling. The fatty acids thus are freed from their
combination with glycerine and solidify upon cooling, after which they
are separated from the water and pressed at a higher or lower
temperature. The oleic acid, being liquid at ordinary temperature,
together with some stearic and palmitic acid, is thus pressed out. These
latter acids are usually separated by distillation, combined with the
press cake further purified and sold as stearic acid.

The red oil, sometimes called saponified red oil, is often semi-solid,
resembling a soft tallow, due to the presence of stearic acid. The
distilled oils are usually clear, varying in color from light to a deep
brown. Stearic acid, which reaches the trade in slab form, varies in
quality from a soft brown, greasy, crumbly solid of unpleasant odor to a
snow white, wax-like, hard, odorless mass. The quality of stearic acid
is best judged by the melting point, since the presence of any oleic
acid lowers this. The melting point of the varieties used in soap
manufacture usually ranges from 128° to 132° F. Red oil is used in the
manufacture of textile soaps, replacing olive oil foots soap for this
purpose, chlorophyll being used to color the soap green. Stearic acid,
being the hard firm fatty acid, may be used in small quantities to give
a better grade of soap body and finish. In adding this substance it
should always be done in the crutcher, as it will not mix in the kettle.
It finds its largest use for soap, however, in the manufacture of
shaving soaps and shaving creams, since it produces the non-drying
creamy lather so greatly desired for this purpose. Both red oil and
stearic acid being fatty acids, readily unite with the alkali
carbonates, carbon dioxide being formed in the reaction and this method
is extensively used in the formation of soap from them.


RANCIDITY OF OILS AND FATS.

Rancidity in neutral oils and fats is one of the problems the soap
manufacturer has to contend with. The mere saying that an oil is rancid
is no indication of its being high in free acid. The two terms rancidity
and acidity are usually allied. Formerly, the acidity of a fat was
looked upon as the direct measure of its rancidity. This idea is still
prevalent in practice and cannot be too often stated as incorrect. Fats
and oils may be _acid_, or _rancid_, or _acid and rancid_. In an acid
fat there has been a hydrolysis of the fat and it has developed a rather
high percentage of free acid. A rancid fat is one in which have been
developed compounds of an odoriferous nature. An acid and rancid fat is
one in which both free acid and organic compounds of the well known
disagreeable odors have been produced.

It cannot be definitely stated just how this rancidity takes place, any
more than just what are the chemical products causing rancidity. The
only conclusion that one may draw is that the fats are first hydrolyzed
or split up into glycerine and free fatty acids. This is followed by an
oxidation of the products thus formed.

Moisture, air, light, enzymes (organized ferments) and bacteria are all
given as causes of rancidity.

It seems very probable that the initial splitting of the fats is caused
by enzymes, which are present in the seeds and fruits of the vegetable
oils and tissue of animal fats, in the presence of moisture. Lewkowitsch
strongly emphasizes this point and he is substantiated in his idea by
other authorities. Others hold that bacteria or micro-organisms are the
cause of this hydrolysis, citing the fact that they have isolated
various micro-organisms from various fats and oils. The acceptance of
the bacterial action would explain the various methods of preservation
of oils and fats by the use of antiseptic preparations. It cannot,
however, be accepted as a certainty that bacteria cause the rancidity of
fats.

The action of enzymes is a more probable explanation.

The hydrolysis of fats and oils is accelerated when they are allowed to
remain for some time in the presence of organic non-fats. Thus, palm
oil, lower grades of olive oil, and tallow, which has been in contact
with the animal tissue for a long time, all contain other nitrogenous
matter and exhibit a larger percentage of free fatty acid than the oils
and fats not containing such impurities.

Granting this initial splitting of the fat into free fatty acids and
glycerine, this is not a sufficient explanation. The products thus
formed must be acted upon by air and light. It is by the action of these
agents that there is a further action upon the products, and from this
oxidation we ascertain by taste and smell (chemical means are still
unable to define rancidity) whether or not a fat is rancid. While some
authorities have presumed to isolate some of these products causing
rancidity, we can only assume the presence of the various possible
compounds produced by the action of air and light which include oxy
fatty acids, lactones, alcohols, esters, aldehydes and other products.

The soap manufacturer is interested in rancidity to the extent of the
effect upon the finished soap. Rancid fats form darker soaps than fats
in the neutral state, and very often carry with them the disagreeable
odor of a rancid oil. Further, a rancid fat or oil is usually high in
free acid. It is by no means true, however, that rancidity is a measure
for acidity, for as has already been pointed out, an oil may be rancid
and not high in free acid.

The percentage of free fatty acid is of even greater importance in the
soap industry. The amount of glycerine yield is dependent upon the
percentage of free fatty acid and is one of the criterions of a good fat
or oil for soap stock.


PREVENTION OF RANCIDITY.

Since moisture, air, light and enzymes, produced by the presence of
organic impurities, are necessary for the rancidity of a fat or oil, the
methods of preventing rancidity are given. Complete dryness, complete
purification of fats and oils and storage without access of air or light
are desirable. Simple as these means may seem, they can only be
approximated in practice. The most difficult problem is the removal of
the last trace of moisture. Impurities may be lessened very often by the
use of greater care. In storing it is well to store in closed barrels or
closed iron tanks away from light, as it has been observed that oils and
fats in closed receptacles become rancid less rapidly than those in open
ones, even though this method of storing is only partially attained.
Preservatives are also used, but only in edible products, where their
effectiveness is an open question.


CHEMICAL CONSTANTS OF OILS AND FATS.

Besides the various physical properties of oils and fats, such as
color, specific gravity, melting point, solubility, etc., they may be
distinguished chemically by a number of chemical constants. These are
the iodine number, the acetyl value, saponification number,
Reichert-Meissl number for volatile acids, Hehner number for insoluble
acids. These constants, while they vary somewhat with any particular oil
or fat, are more applicable to the edible products and are criterions
where any adulteration of fat or oil is suspected. The methods of
carrying out the analyses of oils and fats to obtain these constants are
given in the various texts[2] on oils and fats, and inasmuch as they are
not of great importance to the soap industry they are merely mentioned
here.


OIL HARDENING OR HYDROGENATING.

It is very well known that oils and fats vary in consistency and
hardness, depending upon the glycerides forming same. Olein, a
combination of oleic acid and glycerine, as well as oleic acid itself
largely forms the liquid portion of oils and fats. Oleic acid
(C_{18}H_{34}O_{2}) is an unsaturated acid and differs from stearic acid
(C_{18}H_{36}O_{2}), the acid forming the hard firm portion of oils and
fats, by containing two atoms of hydrogen less in the molecule.
Theoretically it should be a simple matter to introduce two atoms of
hydrogen into oleic acid or olein, and by this mere addition convert
liquid oleic acid and olein into solid stearic acid and stearine.

For years this was attempted and all attempts to apply the well known
methods of reduction (addition of hydrogen) in organic chemistry, such
as treatment with tin and acid, sodium amalgam, etc., were unsuccessful.
In recent years, however, it has been discovered that in the presence of
a catalyzer, nickel in finely divided form or the oxides of nickel are
usually employed, the process of hydrogenating an oil is readily
attained upon a practical basis.

The introduction of hardened oils has opened a new source of raw
material for the soap manufacturer in that it is now possible to use
oils in soap making which were formerly discarded because of their
undesirable odors. Thus fish or train oils which had up to the time of
oil hydrogenating resisted all attempts of being permanently deodorized,
can now be employed very satisfactorily for soap manufacture. A Japanese
chemist, Tsujimoto[3] has shown that fish oils contain an unsaturated
acid of the composition C_{18}H_{28}O_{2}, for which he proposed the
name clupanodonic acid. By the catalytic hardening of train oils this
acid passes to stearic acid and the problem of deodorizing these oils is
solved.[4]

At first the introduction of hardened oils for soap manufacture met with
numerous objections, due to the continual failures of obtaining a
satisfactory product by the use of same. Various attempts have now shown
that these oils, particularly hardened train oils, produce
extraordinarily useful materials for soap making. These replace
expensive tallow and other high melting oils. It is of course impossible
to employ hardened oils alone, as a soap so hard would thus be obtained
that it would be difficultly soluble in water and possess very little
lathering quality. By the addition of 20-25% of tallow oil or some other
oil forming a soft soap a very suitable soap for household use may be
obtained. Ribot[5] discusses this matter fully. Hardened oils readily
saponify, may be perfumed without any objections and do not impart any
fishy odor to an article washed with same. Meyerheim[6] states that
through the use of hydrogenated oils the hardness of soap is
extraordinarily raised, so that soap made from hardened cottonseed oil
is twelve times as hard as the soap made from ordinary cottonseed oil.
This soap is also said to no longer spot yellow upon aging, and as a
consequence of its hardness, is able to contain a considerably higher
content of rosin through which lathering power and odor may be improved.
Hardened oils can easily be used for toilet soap bases, provided they
are not added in too great a percentage.

The use of hardened oils is not yet general, but there is little doubt
that the introduction of this process goes a long way toward solving the
problem of cheaper soap material for the soap making industry.


GREASE.

Grease varies so greatly in composition and consistency that it can
hardly be classed as a distinctive oil or fat. It is obtained from
refuse, bones, hides, etc., and while it contains the same constituents
as tallow, the olein content is considerably greater, which causes it to
be more liquid in composition. Grease differs in color from an off-white
to a dark brown. The better qualities are employed in the manufacture of
laundry and chip soap, while the poorer qualities are only fit for the
cheapest of soaps used in scrubbing floors and such purposes. There is
usually found in grease a considerable amount of gluey matter, lime and
water. The percentage of free fatty acid is generally high.

The darker grades of grease are bleached before being used. This is done
by adding a small quantity of sodium nitrate to the melted grease and
agitating, then removing the excess saltpeter by decomposing with
sulphuric acid. A better method of refining, however, is by
distillation. The chrome bleach is also applicable.


ROSIN (COLOPHONY, YELLOW ROSIN, RESINA).

Rosin is the residue which remains after the distillation of turpentine
from the various species of pines. The chief source of supply is in the
States of Georgia North and South Carolina. It is a transparent, amber
colored hard pulverizable resin. The better grades are light in color
and known as water white (w. w.) and window glass (w. g.). These are
obtained from a tree which has been tapped for the first year. As the
same trees are tapped from year to year, the product becomes deeper and
darker in color until it becomes almost black.

The constituents of rosin are chiefly (80-90%) abietic acid or its
anhydride together with pinic and sylvic acids. Its specific gravity is
1.07-1.08, melting point about 152.5 C., and it is soluble in alcohol,
ether, benzine, carbon disulfide, oils, alkalis and acetic acid. The
main use of rosin, outside of the production of varnishes, is in the
production of laundry soaps, although a slight percentage acts as a
binder and fixative for perfumes in toilet soaps and adds to their
detergent properties. Since it is mainly composed of acids, it readily
unites with alkaline carbonates, though the saponification is not quite
complete and the last portion must be completed through the use of
caustic hydrates, unless an excess of 10% carbonate over the theoretical
amount is used. A lye of 20° B. is best adapted to the saponification of
rosin when caustic hydrates are employed for this purpose, since weak
lyes cause frothing. While it is sometimes considered that rosin is an
adulterant for soap, this is hardly justifiable, as it adds to the
cleansing properties of soap. Soaps containing rosin are of the well
known yellowish color common to ordinary laundry soaps. The price of
rosin has so risen in the last few years that it presents a problem of
cost to the soap manufacturer considering the price at which laundry
soaps are sold.


ROSIN SAPONIFICATION.

As has been stated, rosin may be saponified by the use of alkaline
carbonates. On account of the possibility of the soap frothing over, the
kettle in which the operation takes place should be set flush with the
floor, which ought to be constructed of cement. The kettle itself is an
open one with round bottom, equipped with an open steam coil and skimmer
pipe, and the open portion is protected by a semi-circular rail. A
powerful grid, having a 3-inch mesh, covers one-half of the kettle, the
sharp edges protruding upwards.

The staves from the rosin casks are removed at the edge of the kettle,
the rosin placed on the grid and beaten through with a hammer to break
it up into small pieces.

To saponify a ton of rosin there are required 200 lbs. soda ash, 1,600
lbs. water and 100 lbs. salt. Half the water is run into the kettle,
boiled, and then the soda ash and half the salt added. The rosin is now
added through the grid and the mixture thoroughly boiled. As carbon
dioxide is evolved by the reaction the boiling is continued for one hour
to remove any excess of this gas. A portion of the salt is gradually
added to grain the soap well and to keep the mass in such condition as
to favor the evolution of gas. The remainder of the water is added to
close the soap and boiling continued for one or two hours longer. At
this point the kettle must be carefully watched or it will boil over
through the further escape of carbon dioxide being hindered. The mass,
being in a frothy condition, will rapidly settle by controlling the flow
of steam. The remaining salt is then scattered in and the soap allowed
to settle for two hours or longer. The lyes are then drained off the
top. If the rosin soap is required for toilet soaps, it is grained a
second time. The soap is now boiled with the water caused by the
condensation of the steam, which changes it to a half grained soap
suitable for pumping. A soap thus made contains free soda ash 0.15% or
less, free rosin about 15%. The mass is then pumped to the kettle
containing the soap to which it is to be added at the proper stage. The
time consumed in thus saponifying rosin is about five hours.


NAPHTHENIC ACIDS.

The naphtha or crude petroleum of the various provinces in Europe, as
Russia, Galacia, Alsace and Roumania yield a series of bodies of acid
character upon refining which are designated under the general name of
naphthenic acids. These acids are retained in solution in the alkaline
lyes during the distillation of the naphtha in the form of alkaline
naphthenates. Upon adding dilute sulphuric acid to these lyes the
naphthenates are decomposed and the naphthenic acids float to the
surface in an oily layer of characteristic disagreeable odor and varying
from yellow to brown in color[7]. In Russia particularly large
quantities of these acids are employed in the manufacture of soap.

The soaps formed from naphthenic acids have recently been
investigated[8] and found to resemble the soaps made from cocoanut oil
and palm kernel oil, in that they are difficult to salt out and
dissociate very slightly with water. The latter property makes them
valuable in textile industries when a mild soap is required as a
detergent, e. g., in the silk industry. These soaps also possess a high
solvent power for mineral oils and emulsify very readily. The mean
molecular weight of naphthenic acids themselves is very near that of the
fatty acids contained in cocoanut oil, and like those of cocoanut oil a
portion of the separated acids are volatile with steam. The iodine
number indicates a small content of unsaturated acids.

That naphthenic acids are a valuable soap material is now recognized,
but except in Russia the soap is not manufactured to any extent at the
present time.


ALKALIS.

The common alkali metals which enter into the formation of soap are
sodium and potassium. The hydroxides of these metals are usually used,
except in the so called carbonate saponification of free fatty acids in
which case sodium and potassium carbonate are used. A water solution of
the caustic alkalis is known as lye, and it is as lyes of various
strengths that they are added to oils and fats to form soap. The density
or weight of a lye is considerably greater than that of water, depending
upon the amount of alkali dissolved, and its weight is usually
determined by a hydrometer. This instrument is graduated by a
standardized scale, and while all hydrometers should read alike in a
liquid of known specific gravity, this is generally not the case, so
that it is advisable to check a new hydrometer for accurate work against
one of known accuracy. In this country the Baumé scale has been adopted,
while in England a different graduation known as the Twaddle scale is
used. The strength of a lye or any solution is determined by the
distance the instrument sinks into the solution, and we speak of the
strength of a solution as so many degrees Baumé or Twaddle which are
read to the point where the meniscus of the lye comes on the graduated
scale. Hydrometers are graduated differently for liquids of different
weights. In the testing of lyes one which is graduated from 0° to 50° B.
is usually employed.

_Caustic soda_ is received by the consumer in iron drums weighing
approximately 700 lbs. each. The various grades are designated as 60,
70, 74, 76 and 77%. These percentages refer to the percentage of sodium
oxide (Na_{2}O) in 100 parts of pure caustic soda formed by the
combination of 77-1/2 parts of sodium oxide and 22-1/2 parts of water,
77-1/2% being chemically pure caustic soda. There are generally
impurities present in commercial caustic soda. These consist of sodium
carbonate, sodium chloride or common salt and sometimes lime. It is
manufactured by treating sodium carbonate in an iron vessel with calcium
hydroxide or slaked lime, or by electrolysis of common salt. The latter
process has yet been unable to compete with the former in price.
Formerly all the caustic soda used in soap making was imported, and it
was only through the American manufacturer using a similar container to
that used by foreign manufacturers that they were able to introduce
their product. This prejudice has now been entirely overcome and most of
the caustic soda used in this country is manufactured here.


CAUSTIC POTASH.

The output of the salts containing potassium is controlled almost
entirely by Germany. Formerly the chief source of supply of potassium
compounds was from the burned ashes of plants, but about fifty years ago
the inexhaustible salt mines of Stassfurt, Germany, were discovered.
The salt there mined contains, besides the chlorides and sulphates of
sodium, magnesium, calcium and other salts, considerable quantities of
potassium chloride, and the Stassfurt mines at present are practically
the entire source of all potassium compounds, in spite of the fact that
other localities have been sought to produce these compounds on a
commercial basis, especially by the United States government.

After separating the potassium chloride from the magnesium chloride and
other substances found in Stassfurt salts the methods of manufacture of
caustic potash are identical to those of caustic soda. In this case,
however, domestic electrolytic caustic potash may be purchased cheaper
than the imported product and it gives results equal to those obtained
by the use of the imported article, opinions to the contrary among soap
makers being many. Most of the caustic potash in the United States is
manufactured at Niagara Falls by the Niagara Alkali Co., and the Hooker
Electrochemical Co., chlorine being obtained as a by-product. The latter
concern employs the Townsend Cell, for the manufacture of electrolytic
potash, and are said to have a capacity for making 64 tons of alkali
daily.

Since the molecular weight of caustic potash (56) is greater than that
of caustic soda (40) more potash is required to saponify a pound of fat.
The resulting potash soap is correspondingly heavier than a soda soap.
When salt is added to a potassium soap double decomposition occurs, the
potassium soap being transformed to a sodium soap and the potassium
uniting with the chlorine to form potassium chloride. This was one of
the earliest methods of making a hard soap, especially in Germany, where
potash was derived from leeching ashes of burned wood and plants.


SODIUM CARBONATE (SODA ASH).

While carbonate of soda is widely distributed in nature the source of
supply is entirely dependent upon the manufactured product. Its uses are
many, but it is especially important to the soap industry in the so
called carbonate saponification of free fatty acids, as a constituent of
soap powders, in the neutralization of glycerine lyes and as a filler
for laundry soaps.

The old French Le Blanc soda process, which consists in treating common
salt with sulphuric acid and reducing the sodium sulphate (salt cake)
thus formed with carbon in the form of charcoal or coke to sodium
sulphide, which when treated with calcium carbonate yields a mixture of
calcium sulphide and sodium carbonate (black ash) from which the
carbonate is dissolved by water, has been replaced by the more recent
Solvay ammonia soda process. Even though there is a considerable loss of
salt and the by-product calcium chloride produced by this process is
only partially used up as a drying agent, and for refrigerating
purposes, the Le Blanc process cannot compete with the Solvay process,
so that the time is not far distant when the former will be considered a
chemical curiosity. In the Solvay method of manufacture sodium chloride
(common salt) and ammonium bicarbonate are mixed in solution. Double
decomposition occurs with the formation of ammonium chloride and sodium
bicarbonate. The latter salt is comparatively difficultly soluble in
water and crystallizes out, the ammonium chloride remaining in solution.
When the sodium bicarbonate is heated it yields sodium carbonate, carbon
dioxide and water; the carbon dioxide is passed into ammonia which is
set free from the ammonium chloride obtained as above by treatment with
lime (calcium oxide) calcium chloride being the by-product.

Sal soda or washing soda is obtained by recrystallizing a solution of
soda ash in water. Large crystals of sal soda containing but 37% sodium
carbonate are formed.


POTASSIUM CARBONATE.

Potassium carbonate is not extensively used in the manufacture of soap.
It may be used in the forming of soft soaps by uniting it with free
fatty acids. The methods of manufacture are the same as for sodium
carbonate, although a much larger quantity of potassium carbonate than
carbonate of soda is obtained from burned plant ashes. Purified
potassium carbonate is known as _pearl ash_.


ADDITIONAL MATERIAL USED IN SOAP MAKING.

Water is indispensable to the soap manufacturer. In the soap factory
_hard_ water is often the cause of much trouble. Water, which is the
best solvent known, in passing through the crevices of rocks dissolves
some of the constituents of these, and the water is known as hard. This
hardness is of two kinds, _temporary_ and _permanent_. Temporarily hard
water is formed by water, which contains carbonic acid, dissolving a
portion of calcium carbonate or carbonate of lime. Upon boiling, the
carbonic acid is driven from the water and the carbonate, being
insoluble in carbon dioxide free water, is deposited. This is the cause
of boiler scale, and to check this a small amount of sal ammoniac may be
added to the water, which converts the carbonate into soluble calcium
chloride and volatile ammonium carbonate. Permanent hardness is caused
by calcium sulphate which is soluble in 400 parts of water and cannot be
removed by boiling.

The presence of these salts in water form insoluble lime soaps which act
as inert bodies as far as their value for the common use of soap is
concerned. Where the percentage of lime in water is large this should be
removed. A method generally used is to add about 5% of 20° B. sodium
silicate to the hard water. This precipitates the lime and the water is
then sufficiently pure to use.

_Salt_, known as sodium chloride, is used to a large extent in soap
making for "salting out" the soap during saponification, as well as
graining soaps. Soap ordinarily soluble in water is insoluble in a salt
solution, use of which is made by adding salt to the soap which goes
into solution and throws any soap dissolved in the lyes out of solution.
Salt may contain magnesium and calcium chlorides, which of course are
undesirable in large amounts. The products on the market, however, are
satisfactory, thus no detail is necessary.

_Filling materials_ used are sodium silicate, or water glass, talc,
silex, pumice, starch, borax, tripoli, etc.

Besides these other materials are used in the refining of the oils and
fats, and glycerine recovery, such as Fuller's earth, bichromates of
soda or potash, sulphate of alumina, sulphuric and hydrochloric acids
and alcohol.

A lengthy description of these substances is not given, as their modes
of use are detailed elsewhere.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Seifensieder Zeit, 1913, 40, p. 687, 724, 740.

[2] Official Methods, see Bull. 107, A. O. A. C., U. S. Dept. Agricult.

[3] Journ. Coll. of Engin. Tokyo Imper. Univ. (1906), p. 1. Abs. Chem.
Revue f. d. Fett-u. Harz, Ind. 16, p. 84; 20, p. 8.

[4] Meyerheim--Fort. der Chem., Physik. und Physik. Chem. (1913), 8. 6,
p. 293-307.

[5] Seifs. Ztg. (1913), 40, p. 142.

[6] Loc. cit.

[7] Les Matieres Graisses (1914), 7, 69, p. 3367.

[8] Zeit. f. Angew. Chem. (1914), 27, 1, p. 2-4.




CHAPTER II

Construction and Equipment of a Soap Plant.


No fixed plan for the construction and equipment of a soap plant can be
given. The specifications for a soap factory to be erected or remodeled
must suit the particular cases. Very often a building which was
constructed for a purpose other than soap manufacture must be adapted
for the production of soap. In either case it is a question of
engineering and architecture, together with the knowledge obtained in
practice and the final decision as to the arrangement is best solved by
a conference with those skilled in each of these branches.

An ideal soap plant is one in which the process of soap making, from the
melting out of the stock to the packing and shipping of the finished
product, moves downward from floor to floor, since by this method it is
possible to utilize gravitation rather than pumping liquid fats and
fluid soaps. Convenience and economy are obtained by such an
arrangement.

The various machinery and other equipment for soap manufacture are well
known to those connected with this industry. It varies, of course,
depending upon the kind of soap to be manufactured, and full
descriptions of the necessary machinery are best given in the catalogs
issued by the manufacturers of such equipment, who in this country are
most reliable.

To know just what equipment is necessary can very easily be described by
a brief outline of the process various soaps undergo to produce the
finished article. After the saponification has taken place in the _soap
kettle_ the molten soap is run directly into the soap _frames_, which
consist of an oblong compartment, holding anywhere from 400 to 1,200
pounds, with removable steel sides and mounted upon trucks, in which it
solidifies. In most cases it is advisable to first run the soap into a
_crutcher_ or mixer which produces a more homogeneous mass than if this
operation is omitted. Color and perfume may also be added at this point,
although when a better grade of perfume is added it must be remembered
that there is considerable loss due to volatilization of same. When a
_drying machine_ is employed the molten soap is run directly upon the
rollers of this machine, later adding about 1.0% zinc oxide to the soap
from which it passes continuously through the drying chamber and is
emitted in chip form ready for milling. After the soap has been framed,
it is allowed to cool and solidify, which takes several days, and then
the sides of the frame are stripped off. The large solid cake is cut
with wires by hand or by a _slabber_ into slabs of any desired size.
These slabs are further divided into smaller divisions by the _cutting
table_. In non-milled soaps (laundry soaps, floating soaps, etc.), these
are pressed at this stage, usually by automatic presses, after a thin
hard film has been formed over the cake by allowing it to dry slightly.
In making these soaps they are not touched by hand at any time during
the operation, the pressing, wrapping and packing all being done by
machinery. For a milled soap the large slabs are cut into narrow oblong
shapes by means of the cutting table to readily pass into the feeder of
the _chipper_, the chips being spread upon _trays_ and dried in a _dry
house_ until the moisture content is approximately 15%.

The process of milling is accomplished by passing the dried soap chips
through a _soap mill_, which is a machine consisting of usually three or
four contiguous, smooth, granite rollers operated by a system of gears
and set far enough apart to allow the soap to pass from a hopper to the
first roller, from which it is constantly conveyed to each succeeding
roller as a thin film, and finally scraped from the last roller to fall
into the _milling box_ in thin ribbon form. These mills are often
operated in tandem, which necessitates less handling of soap by the
operator. The object of milling is to give the soap a glossy, smooth
finish and to blend it into a homogeneous mass. The perfume, color,
medication or any other material desired are added to the dried soap
chips prior to milling. Some manufacturers use an _amalgamator_ to
distribute these uniformly through the soap, which eliminates at least
one milling. When a white soap is being put through the mill, it is
advisable to add from 0.5% to 1% of a good, fine quality of zinc oxide
to the soap, if this substance has not been previously added. This
serves to remove the yellowish cast and any translucency occasioned by
plodding. Too great a quantity of this compound added, later exhibits
itself by imparting to the soap a dead white appearance. Inasmuch as the
milling process is one upon which the appearance of a finished cake of
toilet soap largely depends, it should be carefully done. The number of
times a soap should be milled depends upon the character of a soap being
worked. It should of course be the object to mill with as high a
percentage of moisture as possible. Should the soap become too dry it is
advisable to add water directly, rather than wet soap, since water can
more easily be distributed through the mass. As a general statement it
may be said it is better policy to overmill a soap, rather than not mill
it often enough.

After the soap has been thoroughly milled it is ready for plodding. A
_plodder_ is so constructed as to take the soap ribbons fed into the
hopper by means of a worm screw and continuously force it under great
pressure through a jacketed cylinder through which cold water circulates
in the rear to compensate the heat produced by friction and hot water at
the front, to soften and polish the soap which passes out in solid form
in bars of any shape and size depending upon the form of the _shaping
plate_ through which it is emitted. The bars run upon a _roller board_,
are cut into the required length by a special _cake cutting table_,
allowed to dry slightly and pressed either automatically or by a foot
power _press_ in any suitable soap _die_. The finished cake is then
ready for wrapping and after due time in stock reaches the consumer.

Besides the various apparatus mentioned above there are many other parts
for the full equipment of a modern soap plant, such as remelters, pumps,
mixers, special tanks, power equipment, etc. As has been stated,
however, practical experience will aid in judging the practicability as
to installation of these. The various methods of powdering soap are,
however, not generally known. Where a coarse powder is to be produced,
such as is used for common washing powders, no great difficulty is
experienced with the well known Blanchard mill. In grinding soap to an
impalpable powder the difficulties increase. The methods adapted in
pulverizing soaps are by means of disintegrators, pebble mills and
chaser mills. The disintegrator grinds by the principle of attrition,
that is, the material is reduced by the particles being caused to beat
against each other at great velocity; a pebble mill crushes the
substance by rubbing it between hard pebbles in a slowly revolving
cylinder; the chaser mill first grinds the material and then floats it
as a very fine powder above a curb of fixed height. The last method is
particularly adapted for the finest of powder (140 mesh and over).




CHAPTER III

Classification of Soap-Making Methods.


In the saponification of fats and oils to form soap through the agency
of caustic alkalis, as has been stated, the sodium or potassium salts of
the mixed fatty acids are formed. Sodium soaps are usually termed hard
soaps, and potassium soaps soft. There are, however, a great many
varieties of soaps the appearance and properties of which depend upon
their method of manufacture and the oils or fats used therein.

The various methods adopted in soap making may be thus classified:

1. Boiling the fats and oils in open kettles by open steam with
indefinite quantities of caustic alkali solutions until the finished
soap is obtained; ordinarily named _full boiled soaps_. These may be
sub-divided into (a) hard soaps with sodium hydrate as a base, in which
the glycerine is recovered from the spent lyes; (b) hard soaps with soda
as a base, in which the glycerine remains in the soap, e. g., marine
cocoanut oil soaps; (c) soft potash soaps, in which the glycerine is
retained by the soap.

2. Combining the required amount of lye for complete saponification of a
fat therewith, heating slightly with dry heat and then allowing the
saponification to complete itself. This is known as the _cold process_.

3. Utilizing the fatty acid, instead of the neutral fat, and combining
it directly with caustic alkali or carbonate, which is incorrectly
termed _carbonate saponification_, since it is merely neutralizing the
free fatty acid and thus is not a saponification in the true sense of
the word. No glycerine is directly obtained by this method, as it is
usually previously removed in the clearage of the fat by either the
Twitchell or autoclave saponification method.

In the methods thus outlined the one most generally employed is the full
boiled process to form a sodium soap. This method of making soap
requires close attention and a knowledge which can only be obtained by
constant practice. The stock, strength of lyes, heat, amount of salt or
brine added, time of settling, etc., are all influencing factors.

The principles involved in this process are briefly these:

The fat is partly saponified with weak lyes (usually those obtained from
a previous boiling in the strengthening change are used), and salt is
added to grain the soap. The mass is then allowed to settle into two
layers. The upper layer is partly saponified fat; the lower layer, or
spent lye, is a solution of salt, glycerine, and contains any albuminous
matter or any other impurity contained in the fat. This is known as the
_killing_ or glycerine change. Strong lyes are now added and the fat
entirely saponified, which is termed the _strengthening change_. The
mass is then allowed to settle and the fluid soap run off above the
"nigre." This operation is called the finish or _finishing_ change.

The method may be more fully illustrated by a concrete example of the
method of manufacture of a tallow base:

    Charge--

    Tallow              88 per cent.
    Cocoanut oil        10 per cent.
    Rosin w. w.          2 per cent.

        Amount charge   10 tons

About five tons of tallow and one ton of cocoanut oil are pumped or run
into the soap kettle and brought to a boil with wet steam until it
briskly comes through the hot fat. The caustic soda (strengthening lyes
from former boilings may be used here) is gradually added by the
distributing pipe, any tendency to thicken being checked by the
introduction of small quantities of brine ("salt pickle"). If the lye is
added too rapidly the soap assumes a granular appearance, indicating
that the addition of same must be discontinued. Water should then be
added and the mass boiled through until it again closes. When the
addition of the proper amount of caustic soda is nearing its completion
the soap gradually thins. The steam is now cut down to about one turn of
the valve, and brine is rapidly added or salt shoveled in. In ten to
fifteen minutes the steam again breaks through and, from the appearance
of the soap, it can be seen whether sufficient brine has been added. A
sample taken out by means of a long wooden paddle should show the soap
in fine grains with the lyes running from it clear. The steam is then
shut off and the soap allowed to settle from one and one-half to two
hours. In all settlings the longer time this operation is permitted to
continue, the better will the subsequent operations proceed.

The mixture now consists of a partly saponified layer of fat above the
spent lyes. The lyes are drawn off until soap makes its appearance at
the exit pipe. The valve is then closed and the soap blown back into the
kettle by steam. The lyes thus obtained are known as _spent lyes_, from
which the glycerine is recovered. They should show an alkalinity of
approximately 0.5 per cent. if the operation is carefully carried out.

The remaining tallow is now added and the above operations repeated.

After the spent lyes have been drawn off, the soap is closed with water
and the proper percentage of rosin soap previously formed, or rosin
itself is added to the mass in the kettle. More lye is then allowed to
flow in until the mixture is up to "strength." This is usually tested
by the "bite" on the tongue of a small cooled sample. After boiling
until the steam comes through, the mass is grained with salt as before
and allowed to settle one and one-half to three hours. These lyes, known
as _strengthening lyes_ are run to storage to be used subsequently with
fresh fat to take up the caustic soda contained therein.

The soap is now ready for finishing and is first boiled through and
tried for strength. A drop of phenolphthalein (1 per cent.
phenolphthalein in 98 per cent. alcohol) is allowed to drop on the
molten soap taken up on a trowel. The red color should be instantly
produced and develop to a full deep crimson in a few seconds, or more
lye must be added until this condition is realized. Should it flash a
deep crimson immediately it is on the strong side. This cannot be
conveniently remedied; it can only serve as a guide for the next boil,
but in any case it is not of any serious consequence, unless it is too
strong.

With the steam on, the soap is now examined with a trowel which must be
thoroughly heated by working it about under the surface of the hot soap.
The appearance of the soap as it runs from the face of the trowel
indicates its condition. It is not possible to absolutely describe the
effect, which can only be properly judged by practice, yet the following
points may serve as a guide. The indications to be noticed are the shape
and size of the flakes of soap as the sample on the trowel breaks up and
runs from the hot iron surface, when the latter is turned in a vertical
position, as well as the condition of the iron surface from which the
soap flakes have fallen. A closed soap will run slowly into a
homogeneous sheet, leaving the trowel's surface covered with a thin
layer of transparent soap; a grained mass will run rapidly down in tiny
grains, about one-half an inch in diameter or less, leaving the hot
trowel absolutely dry. The object of the finish is to separate the
soaps of the lower fatty acids from those of the higher, and both from
excess of liquid. A point midway between "open" and "closed" is required
to arrive at this point.

Having arrived at the above condition, the soap is allowed to settle
anywhere from one to three days and then run off through the skimmer
pipes to the nigre and framed or pumped to the tank feeding the drying
machine.

The stock thus obtained should be fairly white, depending upon the grade
of tallow used and slightly alkaline to an alcoholic phenolphthalein
solution. If removed at exactly the neutral point or with a content of
free fat the soap will sooner or later develop rancidity. The soap thus
obtained is an ordinary tallow base, and the one by far greatest used in
the manufacture of toilet soaps. The percentage of cocoanut oil
indicated is not fixed and may readily be varied, while in fine toilet
soap the rosin is usually eliminated.

In the manufacture of full boiled soda soaps in which no glycerine is
obtained as a by-product, it being retained in the soap itself, the soap
formed is known as a "run" soap. The process is used most extensively in
the manufacture of marine soaps by which the method may be best
illustrated. This soap is known as marine soap because of its property
of readily forming a lather with salt water and is mostly consumed
aboard vessels.

Marine soaps are manufactured by first placing in the kettle a
calculated amount of lye of 25 deg. to 35 deg. B., depending upon the
amount of moisture desired in the finished soaps, plus a slight excess
required to saponify a known weight of cocoanut oil. With open steam on,
the cocoanut oil is then gradually added, care being taken that the soap
does not froth over. Saponification takes place readily and when the oil
is entirely saponified the finished soap is put through the process
known as running. This consists in constantly pumping the mass from the
skimmer pipe back into the top of the kettle, the object being to
prevent any settling of the nigre or lye from the soap, as well as
producing a homogeneous mass. It is customary to begin the
saponification in the morning, which should be completed by noon. The
soap is then run for about three hours and framed the next morning.
After having remained in the frame the time required to solidify and
cool, the soap is slabbed and cut into cakes. This process is difficult
to carry out properly, and one not greatly employed, although large
quantities of marine soap are purchased by the government for use in the
navy and must fulfill certain specifications required by the purchasing
department.

In making potash soaps it is practically impossible to obtain any
glycerine directly because of the pasty consistency of the soap, and no
graining is possible because the addition of salt to a soft soap, as
already explained, would form a soda soap. Large quantities of soft
soaps are required for the textile industries who desire mostly a strong
potash soap, and the large number of automobiles in use at the present
time has opened a field for the use of a soft soap for washing these. A
soap for this purpose must be neutral so as not to affect the varnish or
paint of automobiles.

A suitable soap for textile purposes may be made as follows:

    Red oil                         80     parts
    House grease                    20     parts
    Caustic soda lye, 36 degs. B.    3     parts
    Carbonate of potash              5-1/2 parts
    Caustic potash                  23-1/4 parts

Olive oil, corn oil, soya bean oil, olive oil foots or cottonseed oil
may replace any of the above oils. A large quantity of cottonseed oil
will cause the soap to fig.

To carry out the process, the caustic potash and carbonate of potash are
dissolved and placed in the kettle together with the soda lye, and the
oils added. This is most satisfactorily accomplished by being finished
the day before the boiling is begun. The next day the boiling is begun
and water added to bring the soap up to the desired percentage of fatty
acid, due allowance being made for the water formed by the condensation
of the open steam in boiling. Care must be taken that the soap in the
kettle does not swell and run over during the saponification. A good
procedure is to use open steam for a period of about two hours, then
close the valve and allow the saponification to continue without
boiling, and repeat this until it is entirely saponified. After the
saponification has been completed the soap is briskly boiled all day and
the proper corrections made; that is, if too alkaline, more oil is
added, and if free fat is present, more potash. About 2 per cent.
carbonate of potash is the proper amount for a soap containing 50 per
cent. fatty acid. The soap is sampled by allowing it to drop on a clean,
cold glass surface. In so doing, the soap should not slide or slip over
the glass surface when pressed thereon, but should adhere to the glass,
or it is too alkaline. A sample worked between the fingers showing too
much stringiness should have more strong potash and oil added. A sample
taken out in a pail and allowed to cool over night will serve as a guide
as to the body of the soap in the kettle. When the soap has thus been
properly finished it is run into barrels.

For an automobile soap the following is a good working formula:

    Corn oil                       1,000 parts
    Potash lye, 31-1/2 degs. B.      697 parts

Proceed as in the directions just given for textile soap in placing
charge in the kettle. When the kettle is boiling up well, shut off the
steam and the saponification will complete itself. The soap may be run
into the barrels the next day.

A heavy soap with a smaller percentage of fat may be made as follows:

    Corn oil                       1,000 parts
    Potash lye, 24-1/2 degs. B.      900 parts

Boil until the soap bunches, and shovel the finished soap into barrels.
Upon standing it will clear up. By the addition of more water the yield
of soap per pound of oil may be run up to 300 per cent.

After soft soaps have been allowed to stand for some time the phenomenon
known as "figging" often occurs. This term is applied to a
crystalline-like formation, causing spots of a star-like shape
throughout the soap. This is undoubtedly due to the stearine content of
the soap crystallizing out as it cools, and forming these
peculiarly-shaped spots. It more generally occurs in the winter and may
be produced artificially by adding a small quantity of soda to the
potash lye before saponification.

The oils usually employed in the manufacture of potash soaps are
cottonseed oil, corn oil, soya bean oil, olive oil foots, red oil,
cocoanut oil, grease and the various train oils. The usual percentage
yield is from 225 per cent. to 300 per cent., based upon the weight of
oil used. In calculating the weight of a soft soap it is to be
remembered that since potassium has a higher molecular weight (56) than
sodium (40), the corresponding soap formed is that much greater in
weight when compared with a sodium soap. Rosin may be added to soft
soaps as a cheapening agent.


COLD PROCESS.

The cold process for manufacturing soap is the simplest method of soap
making, and the equipment required is small when compared to the other
methods. All the more expensive equipment that is necessary is a
crutcher, a tank to hold the lye, frames, a slabber or cutting table,
and a press. Yet, in spite of the simplicity of thus making soap, the
disadvantages are numerous for the production of a good piece of soap.
The greatest difficulty is to obtain a thorough combination of oil or
fat and lye so that there will not be an excess of one or the other in
the finished soap. At its best there is either a considerable excess of
free fat which later exhibits itself in producing rancidity or
uncombined caustic, which produces an unpleasant effect on the skin when
the soap is consumed for washing. The latter objection, of course, can
only be applied to toilet soaps.

Cocoanut oil is used very largely in the manufacture of cold-made soaps
as it is well adapted for this purpose, although it is by no means true
that other oils may not be employed. Since by this process of
manufacture no impurity contained in the fat or oil is removed in the
making of the soap, it is necessary that in order to obtain a fine
finished product, any impurity contained in these may be removed if
present, or that the fats be as pure as can be obtained. If inedible
tallow is used for cold-made soap, it is advisable to bleach it by the
Fuller's Earth Process.

The carrying out of this method is best illustrated by an example of a
cold-made cocoanut oil soap.

    Charge:

    Cochin cocoanut oil          846 parts
    Lye (soda), 35 degs. B.      470 parts
    Water                         24 parts

The oil is run into the crutcher and the temperature of the oil raised
to 100 degs. F. by dry steam. The lye and water are at room temperature.
After all the oil is in the crutcher, the lye and water are slowly added
to prevent any graining of the soap. Toward the end the lye may be added
more rapidly. When all the lye is in, the mass is crutched for about
three hours, or until upon stopping the crutcher a finger drawn over the
surface of the soap leaves an impression. If this condition is not
realized, the soap must be mixed until such is the case. Having arrived
at this point, the mixture is dropped into a frame which should remain
uncovered. The heat produced by the further spontaneous saponification
will cause the soap to rise in the middle of the frame. After having set
for some days it is ready to be slabbed and cut into cakes.

A potash soap may be made by the cold process just as readily as a soda
soap. Soaps of this type may be made by either of these formulae in a
crutcher:

    Olive oil foots                                  600
    Potash lye, 18 degs. B. hot, 20 degs. B. cold    660

                    or

    Corn oil                                         800
    Rosin                                            200
    Potash lye, 27 degs. B.                          790
    Water                                            340

Heat the oils to 190 degs. F., add the lye and crutch until the soap
begins to bunch, when it is ready to be run into barrels where the
saponification will be completed.

Semi-boiled soaps differ from those made by the cold process in
temperature. In making semi-boiled soaps the fats are usually heated to
140° F. The addition of the lye raises the temperature to 180°--200° F.
when saponification takes place.


CARBONATE SAPONIFICATION.

The method of the formation of soap by the utilization of the fatty acid
directly, from which the glycerine has already been removed by some
method of saponification other than with caustic soda, and neutralizing
this with alkali, is becoming increasingly popular. The glycerine is
more easily recovered from a previous cleavage of the fats or oils, but
a soap made from the mixed fatty acids thus obtained is seldom white in
color and retains an unpleasant odor. Since soda ash or sodium carbonate
is cheaper than caustic soda and readily unites with a fatty acid, it is
used as the alkali in the carbonate saponification. The process is
similar to that already given under Rosin Saponification. About 19 per
cent. by weight of the fatty acids employed of 58 per cent. soda ash is
dissolved in water until it has a density of 30 degs. B., and the
solution is run into the kettle, which is usually equipped with a
removable agitator. The fatty acids, previously melted, are then slowly
added while the mixture is boiled with open steam and agitated with the
stirring device. The fatty acids instantly unite with the carbonate and
rise in the kettle, due to the generation of carbon dioxide, and care
must be exercised to prevent boiling over. After all the fatty acid has
been added, and the mass is boiled through the saponification must be
completed with caustic soda, as there is as yet no practical method
known which will split a fat entirely into fatty acid and glycerine.
Thus about 10 per cent. of the fatty acids are true neutral fats and
require caustic soda for their saponification. This is then added and
the soap completed, as in full-boiled soaps.

In carrying out this method upon a large scale, large
sue\Neanderthal\doroteer\Neanderthal\Josephine\ quantities of carbon
dioxide are formed during the boiling of the soap, which replaces a
quantity of the air contained therein. The kettle room should therefore
be well ventilated, allowing for a large inflow of fresh air from out of
doors.




CHAPTER IV

Classification of Soaps.


In considering the many different varieties of soaps, their
classification is purely an arbitrary one. No definite plan can be
outlined for any particular brand to be manufactured nor can any very
sharp distinction be drawn between the many soaps of different
properties which are designated by various names. It is really a
question to what use a soap is to be put, and at what price it may be
sold. There is, of course, a difference in the appearance, form and
color, and then there are soaps of special kinds, such as floating
soaps, transparent soaps, liquid soaps, etc., yet in the ultimate sense
they are closely allied, because they are all the same chemical
compound, varying only in their being a potash or soda soap, and in the
fatty acids which enter into combination with these alkalis. Thus we can
take a combination of tallow and cocoanut oil and make a great many
presumably different soaps by combining these substances with caustic
soda, by different methods of manufacture and by incorporating various
other ingredients, as air, to form a floating soap, alcohol to make a
transparent soap, dyestuffs to give a different color, etc., but
essentially it is the same definite compound.

The manufacturer can best judge the brand of soaps he desires to
manufacture, and much of his success depends upon the name, package,
shape, color or perfume of a cake of soap. It is the consumer whom he
must please and many of the large selling brands upon the market today
owe their success to the above mentioned details. The great majority of
consumers of soap know very little concerning soap, except the fact
that it washes or has a pleasant odor or looks pretty, and the
manufacturer of soap must study these phases of the subject even more
carefully than the making of the soap itself.

For a matter of convenience we will classify soap under three general
divisions:

I. Laundry soaps, including chip soaps, soap powders and scouring soaps.

II. Toilet soaps, including floating soap, castile soap, liquid soap,
shaving soap, etc.

III. Textile soaps.


LAUNDRY SOAP.

The most popular household soap is laundry soap. A tremendous amount of
this soap is consumed each day in this country, and it is by far
manufactured in larger quantities than any other soap. It is also a soap
which must be sold cheaper than any other soap that enters the home.

The consumers of laundry soap have been educated to use a full boiled
settled rosin soap and to make a good article at a price this method
should be carried out, as it is the one most advisable to use. The
composition of the fats entering into the soap depends upon the market
price of these, and it is not advisable to keep to one formula in the
manufacture of laundry soap, but rather to adjust the various fatty
ingredients to obtain the desired results with the cheapest material
that can be purchased. It is impossible to use a good grade of fats and
make a profit upon laundry soap at the price at which it must be
retailed. The manufacturer of this grade of soap must look to the
by-product, glycerine, for his profit and he is fortunate indeed if he
realizes the entire benefit of this and still produces a superior piece
of laundry soap.


SEMI-BOILED LAUNDRY SOAPS.

It is advantageous at times to make a laundry soap by a method other
than the full boiled settled soap procedure as previously outlined. This
is especially the condition in making a naphtha soap, in which is
incorporated naphtha, which is very volatile and some of the well known
manufacturers of this class of soap have adopted this process entirely.
A laundry soap containing rosin cannot be advantageously made by the
cold process, as the soap thus made grains during saponification and
drops a portion of the lye and filling materials. By making a
semi-boiled soap this objection is overcome. The half boiled process
differs from the cold process by uniting the fats and alkalis at a
higher temperature.

To carry out this process the following formulae have been found by
experience to give satisfactory results.

                     I.         lbs.

    Tallow                       100
    Rosin                         60
    Soda Lye, 36° B.              80

                    II.

    Tallow                       100
    Rosin                         60
    Silicate of Soda              25
    Soda Lye, 36° B.              85

                    III.

    Tallow                       100
    Rosin                        100
    Lye, 36° B.                  105
    Silicate of Soda              25
    Sal Soda Solution             20

In any of these formulas the sodium silicate (40° B.) may be increased
to the same proportion as the fats used. By so doing, however, twenty
pounds of 36° B. lye must be added for every hundred pounds of silicate
additional to that indicated or in other words, for every pound of
silicate added 20 per cent. by weight of 36° B. lye must be put into the
mixture. The rosin may also be replaced by a previously made rosin soap.

To make a semi-boiled soap, using any of the above formulae, first melt
the rosin with all or part of the fat, as rosin when melted alone
readily decomposes. When the mixture is at 150° F. run it into the
crutcher and add the lye. Turn on sufficient dry steam to keep the
temperature of the soap at about 150° F. in the winter or 130° F. in
summer. After the mass has been mixed for half an hour, by continuously
crutching the soap it will at first thicken, then grain and it may again
become thick before it becomes smooth. When the mass is perfectly smooth
and homogeneous drop into a frame and crutch in the frame by hand to
prevent streaking. After standing the required length of time the soap
is finished into cakes as usual.


SETTLED ROSIN SOAP.

Settled rosin soaps are made from tallow, grease, cottonseed oil,
bleached palm oils of the lower grades, corn oil, soya bean oil, arachis
oil, distilled garbage grease, cottonseed foots or fatty acids together
with an addition of rosin, varying from 24 per cent. to 60 per cent. of
the fatty acids which should titer from 28 to 35. A titer lower than 28
will prevent the finished kettle of soap from being capable of later
taking up the filling materials. As has already been stated under
hardened oils, these being very much higher in titer allow a greater
percentage of rosin to be added. Thus hardened fish oils and cottonseed
oil are gradually being more extensively employed in soaps of this
character.

The procedure of handling the kettle is similar to that given under full
boiled soap. The stock is steamed out into a settling tank and allowed
to settle over night, after which it is pumped into the soap kettle.
Having stocked the kettle, open steam is turned on and 10°-12° B. lye is
run in, while using a steam pressure of ninety to one hundred pounds in
order to prevent too great a quantity of condensation of the steam, the
water thus being formed weakening the lye. If a steam pressure of fifty
to sixty pounds is available, a stronger lye (20° B.) should be added.
Care must be taken not to allow the lye to flow in too rapidly or the
soap will not grain. The saponification is only attained by prolonged
boiling with sufficient lye of proper strength. When saponification has
taken place, the mass begins to clear and a sample taken out with a
paddle and cooled should show a slight pink with a 1 per cent. alcoholic
phenolphthalein solution.

It may be stated here that in using this indicator or any other to test
the alkalinity of soap, the soap should always be cooled and firm, as
whenever water is present, the dissociation of the soap thereby will
always react alkaline. When this state is reached the mass is ready for
graining, which is accomplished by distributing salt brine or pickle or
spreading dry salt over the surface of the soap. The kettle is then
thoroughly boiled until the mass shows a soft curd and the lye drops
clearly from a sample taken out with a trowel or paddle. The steam is
then shut off and the soap allowed to settle over night. The lyes are
then run off to the spent lye tank for glycerine recovery. In
saponifying a freshly stocked kettle it is apt to bunch. To prevent this
salt is added at various times to approximately one per cent. of the fat
used.

If, by any possibility the soap has bunched, this condition may be
remedied by the addition of more strong lye and boiling until it is
taken up. To work a kettle to its full capacity it is advisable to make
two "killing" changes. First add about 75 per cent. of the fat and grain
as directed. Run off the spent lyes and then add the remainder of the
stock and repeat the process. When the spent lye has been run to
storage, the open steam is again turned on and 18° B. lye gradually
allowed to run in. The rosin is now broken up and put into the kettle,
or a previously made rosin soap is pumped in.

Lye is then added until the soap has a sharp taste after about three
hours of continuous boiling, or when the soap is in the closed state.
More lye should then be run into the kettle to grain the soap well, the
grain not being too small. Then allow the soap to settle over night and
draw off the strengthening lye. The next day again boil up the kettle
and add water until the soap thins out and rises or swells high in the
kettle. A sample taken out at this stage upon a hot trowel should run
off in large flakes. The surface of the soap should be bright and shiny.

If the sample clings to the trowel, a slight addition of lye will remedy
this defect. The kettle is then allowed to rest, to drop the nigre and
to cool for some time, depending upon the size of the kettle. The proper
temperature is such that after having been pumped to the crutcher and
the filling materials having been added, a thermometer placed into the
mass should indicate 128°-135° F. after the crutcher has run from ten to
fifteen minutes. The filling material may consist of from 7-9 per cent.
of sal soda solution, 36°-37° B. warm or just enough to close up the
soap and make it rise high in the center of a screw crutcher and make it
cling close to a warm trowel. Other fillers such as outlined below are
added at this point.

An addition of from 2-3 per cent. of a special mineral oil for this
purpose will impart a finish to the soap and 3-5 per cent. starch added
prevents the soap from cracking in the frames. Other filling material as
silicate of soda, borax, talc or silex are used. After the filling
material has been thoroughly crutched through the soap it is framed,
and, after being several days in the frame to solidify and cool the soap
is ready for slabbing, pressing and wrapping.

In order to more definitely illustrate the composition of the mixture of
fats and oils entering into the formation of a laundry soap a typical
formula may be given for such a soap containing 40 per cent. rosin added
to the amount of fats used:

                                  lbs.
    Grease                      7,000
    Tallow                      4,000
    Corn Oil                    7,000
    Cottonseed Oil              3,000
    Rosin                       8,400

The following have been found to be satisfactory filling materials and
are calculated upon the basis of a 1,400-pound frame of soap.

                          I.             lbs.

    Sodium Silicate, 38°-40° B.          100
    Mineral Oil                           25
    Sal Soda Solution, 36° B.             80
    Borax                                  1

                         II.

    Sal Soda Solution, 36° B.             80
    Mineral Oil                           25
    Sodium Silicate                       60

                        III.
    Soda Ash                              10
    Sal Soda                              55
    Sodium Silicate                      115
    Mineral Oil                           40
    Brine (Saturated Solution)            10
    Sodium Silicate, 38°-40° B.          100

                         IV.
    Sodium Silicate                      100
    Silex or Talc                        200
    Soda Ash                              50

                         V.

    Sal Soda Solution, 36° B.             90
    Sodium Silicate                    50-60
    Mineral Oil                           25
    Borax Solution, 25° B. (hot)          15


CHIP SOAP.

Chip soap is used extensively in laundries but is also used largely in
other branches. It may be made either as a settled soap or by the cold
made process.

To make a full boiled settled chip soap, proceed as directed under
settled laundry soap. The kettle is stocked with light grease or a
mixture of grease with corn oil or other cheap oils. For this kind of
soap the rosin is eliminated.

Chip soap may be filled as well as laundry soap. This is done in the
crutcher and the following adulterations are suitable.

                                   lbs.
    Settled Soap                   700
    Soda Ash                        35
    Sodium Silicate                215
                     or
    Settled Soap                   700
    Silicate of Soda               560
    Soda Ash                        18
    Carbonate of Potash, 26° B.     50

The cheapest method of drying is by running this soap through a drying
machine and this is the procedure usually carried out for making dried
chip soap.


COLD MADE CHIP SOAPS.

To make chip soaps by the cold process a sweet tallow of low percentage
of free fatty acid should be employed. The tallow is heated to 120° to
135° F. and the lye run in slowly at first and then the silicate of soda
is added. The mass is then mixed until a finger drawn through the soap
leaves a slight impression, then dropped into frames or barrels. Soaps
containing a small percentage of fat should be well covered in the frame
for twenty-four hours to retain their heat and insure proper
saponification. The following formulae are suitable:

                        I.                lbs.
    Tallow                               1,200
    Soda Lye, 35° B.                       850
    Sodium Silicate                        750

                      II.
    Tallow                                 475
    Ceylon Cocoanut Oil                    100
    Soda Lye, 37° B.                       325
    Potash Lye, 37° B.                      56

                      III.
    Tallow                                 500
    Soda Lye, 37-1/2° B.                   297
    Sodium Silicate                        416
    Potash Lye, 37-1/2° B.                  37-1/2

                       IV.
    Tallow                                 450
    Soda Lye, 37-1/2° B.                   255
    Sodium Silicate                        450
    Potash Lye, 37-1/2° B.                  50

                       V.
    Tallow                                 450
    Soda Lye, 35° B.                       470
    Sodium Silicate                        650

                      VI.
    Tallow                                 420
    Sodium Silicate                        600
    Soda Lye, 37-12° B.                    270


UNFILLED CHIP SOAP.

A very good grade of chip soap is made by employing no filling material
whatsoever, but unfortunately the price of this soap has been cut to
such an extent that these can not compete with a filled chip. A number
of the best soaps of this kind are made from a settled soap using a
light grease with corn oil. A soap of this nature is made as follows.

                                          lbs.
    Settled Soap                           800
    Sal Soda Solution, 36°-37° B.          252
    Soda Ash                               182

If this soap is run into frames it may be stripped and chipped in two
days.


SOAP POWDERS.

Soap powders have become so great a convenience as a general cleansing
agent that to eliminate them from the household necessities would mean
much unnecessary energy and work to the great number of consumers of
this product. They may be manufactured so cheaply and still be
efficient, that their use has almost become universal for cleansing and
scouring purposes. The uses to which soap and scouring powders are
adapted are too well known to enter into a description of their
employment. Since they offer a greater profit to the manufacturer than
ordinary household soap, many brands are extensively advertised.

Numerous combinations for soap powders might be cited and it is a simple
matter to vary the ingredients as to fat content and manufacture a
powder of this sort as low as a cent a pound. Many substances are
incorporated with soap, such as salt, soda ash, tripoli, crushed
volcanic deposits, ground feldspar, infusorial earth of various kinds,
silex, etc. In addition to these various fillers, compounds with true
cleansing and bleaching properties, in addition to soap, are added, such
as the salts of ammonium (sal ammoniac, carbonate of ammonia), sodium
perborate and the peroxides of various metals. The public, however, have
been accustomed to receive a large package of soap or scouring powder
for a small amount of money and it is a difficult matter for the
manufacturer to add more expensive substances of this nature to his
product, to increase its efficiency, without raising the price or
decreasing the size of the package.

In manufacturing soap powders, the dried soap chips might be mixed with
the filler and alkali and then pulverized. This method is not
extensively employed nevertheless. The process which is the most
economical is one whereby the ingredients are mixed in a specially
adapted mixer for heavy material until dry and then run directly to the
crusher and pulverizer, after which it is automatically packed, sealed
and boxed. Another method of procedure is to run out the mixture from
the crutcher to the frames, which are stripped before the soap cools,
and is cut up at once, for if it hardens it could not be cut with wires.
It is better, however, to run the mixture into sheets upon a specially
constructed floor and break up the mass when cool.

Formulae for soap powders which have been found to be suitable for
running dry in the mixer follow:

                        I
    Soda ash, 58 per cent.                   42 lbs.
    Silica                                  220  "
    Settled soap (usually cottonseed).       25  "
    Salt                                     10  "

                       II
    Soap (settled cottonseed)                40 lbs.
    Soda ash, 58 per cent.                   60  "

                      III
    Settled soap                            100 lbs.
    Soda ash, 58 per cent.                  400  "

Fillers in varying proportions may replace the soda ash in the above
formulae. It is of course understood that the soap has been previously
made and run as molten soap into the crutcher.

The following soap powders will not dry up in the crutcher upon running,
but are of the class which may be framed or run on the floor to
solidify:


                         I
    Soap                                 850 lbs.
    Filler                               400  "
    Sal soda solution, 20 degs. B        170  "

                       II
    Soap                                 650 lbs.
    Filler                               550  "
    Sal soda solution, 20 degs. B.       340  "

                      III
    Soap                                  80 lbs.
    Filler                               550  "
    Sal soda solution                    170  "

                      IV
    Soap (settled tallow)                800 lbs.
    Filler                               400  "
    Sal soda solution                    170  "
    Water                                100  "

                       V

First saponify 100 parts house grease and 100 parts ordinary grease and
make a run soap. Then use in crutcher either:

    Soap                                 400 lbs.
    Filler                               575  "
    Hot water                             60  "
                         or
    Soap                                 200 lbs.
    Hot water                            200  "
    Filler                               625  "

It would be a simple matter to write numerous additional formulae, but
the above are typical. The manufacturer must judge for himself just what
filling material to use. The filler indicated in the above formulae is
therefore left open. A few formulae for more expensive powders than
those given recently appeared among others in the "Seifensieder
Zeitung"[9]:


                     I

    Powdered soap                         90 lbs.
    Sodium perborate                      10  "

The perborate should be added when the powder is perfectly dry or it
loses its bleaching properties.

                     II

    Soap powder, 20 per cent. fat.
    Cocoanut oil fatty acids              25 lbs.
    Olein                                 25  "
    Bone fat                              70  "
    Soda lye, 30 degs. B.                 90  "
    Water                                150  "
    Ammonium carbonate                   125  "

                     III

    Soap powder, 10 per cent. fat.
    Cocoanut oil fatty acids              20 lbs.
    Olein                                 10  "
    Bone fat                              20  "
    Soda lye, 30 degs. B.                 30  "
    Water                                175  "
    Ammonium carbonate                   175  "


LIGHT OR FLUFFY POWDERS.

Light or fluffy powders containing 35-45% moisture can be made in two
ways. The first method requiring a minimum equipment is to mix the
powder and sal soda in a mixer, allow it to stand in frames for a week
to crystallize or spread it on the floor for a few hours to dry and then
grinding it.

The continuous method finishes the powder in a few minutes and with a
minimum amount of labor. By this process the various ingredients, soap,
soda ash solution, etc., are measured, run by gravity into the mixer,
mixed and the molten mass run over the crystallizer or chilling rolls
thru which either cold water or brine is pumped. From the roll the
powder is scraped off clean by a knife, passes to a screen which sends
the tailings to a grinder, falls into a storage bin from whence it is
weighed and packed by an automatic weighing machine into cartons made up
in most cases by another machine. Due to the large percentage of
moisture contained in these soap powders the carton is generally wrapped
in wax paper to aid in the prevention of the escape of moisture.


SCOURING POWDERS.

Scouring powders are very similar to soap powders and differ only in the
filler used. We have already considered these fillers under scouring
soap, from which they do not differ materially. They are usually
insoluble in water to aid in scouring. The mixer used for substances of
this kind in incorporating the soap and alkali must be of strong
construction.


SCOURING SOAP.

Scouring soaps resemble soap powders very closely in their composition,
in that they are a combination of soap and filling material. Since more
lather is required from a scouring soap than in soap powders, a cocoanut
oil soap is generally used. The usual filling material used is silex.
The greatest difficulty in the manufacture of scouring soap is the
cracking of the finished cake. This is usually due to the incorporation
of too great an amount of filler, or too high a percentage of moisture.

In manufacturing these soaps the cocoanut oil is saponified in the
crutcher with 38 degs. B. lye, or previously saponified as a run soap,
as already described under "Marine Soaps." To twenty-five parts of soap
are added a percentage of 38 degs. B. sal soda or soda ash solution,
together with a small quantity of salt brine. To this mixture in the
crutcher seventy-five parts of silex are then added, and a sufficient
amount of hot water to make the mass flow readily. Care must be
exercised to not add too great a quantity of water or the mass will
crack when it cools. The mass is then framed and cut before it sets, or
poured into molds and allowed to set. While silex is the most
extensively used filler for scouring soaps, it is feasible to
incorporate other substances of like character, although it is to be
remembered that the consumer is accustomed to a white cake, such as
silex produces. Any other material used to replace silex should also be
as fine as this product.


FLOATING SOAP.

Floating soap occupies a position midway between laundry and toilet
soap. Since it is not highly perfumed and a large piece of soap may be
purchased for small cost, as is the case with laundry soap, it is
readily adaptable to general household use. Floating soap differs from
ordinary soap in having air crutched into it which causes the soap to
float in water. This is often advantageous, especially as a bath soap,
and undoubtedly the largest selling brand of soap on the American market
today is a floating soap.

In the manufacture of floating soap a high proportion of cocoanut oil is
necessary. A most suitable composition is one part cocoanut oil to one
part of tallow. This is an expensive stock for the highest grade of soap
and is usually cheapened by the use of cottonseed or various other
liquid oils. Thus it is possible to obtain a floating soap from a kettle
stocked with 30 per cent. cocoanut oil, 15 per cent. cottonseed oil and
55 per cent. tallow. With this quality of soap, however, there is a
possibility of sweating and rancidity, and of the soap being too soft
and being poor in color.

The process of manufacture is to boil the soap in an ordinary soap
kettle, after which air is worked into the hot soap by a specially
constructed crutcher, after which the soap is framed, slabbed, cut into
cakes and pressed.

Concerning the boiling of the soap, the saponification must be carefully
carried out, as the high proportion of cocoanut oil may cause a violent
reaction in the kettle causing it to boil over.

The method of procedure is the same as for a settled soap up to the
finishing. When the mass is finally settled after the finish, the soap
should be more on the "open" side, and the object should be to get as
long a piece of goods as possible.

Due to its high melting point, a much harder crust forms on the surface
of a floating soap and in a greater proportion than on a settled soap
during the settling. In a large kettle, in fact, it has been found
impossible to break through this crust by the ordinary procedure to
admit the skimmer pipe. Much of the success of the subsequent operations
depends upon the completeness of the settling, and in order to overcome
the difficulties occasioned by the formation of the crust everything
possible should be done in the way of covering the kettle completely to
enable this period of settling to continue as long as possible.

When the soap is finished it is run into a specially constructed U-shape
crutcher, a Strunz crutcher is best adapted to this purpose, although a
rapidly revolving upright screw crutcher has been found to give
satisfaction upon a smaller scale, and a sufficient quantity of air
beaten into the soap to make it light enough to float. Care must be
taken not to run the crutcher too rapidly or the soap will be entirely
too fobby. During this operation the mass of soap increases in bulk,
and after it has been established how much air must be put into the soap
to satisfy the requirements, this increase in bulk is a criterion to
estimate when this process is completed.

It is of course understood that the longer the crutching continues the
greater quantity of air is incorporated and the increase of volume must
be established for a particular composition by sampling, cooling the
sample rapidly and seeing if it floats in water. If the beating is
continued too long an interval of time, the finished soap is too spongy
and useless.

The temperature of the mass during crutching is most important. This
must never exceed 158 degrees F. At 159 degrees F. the operation is not
very successful, yet the thermometer may indicate 140 degrees F. without
interfering with this operation. If, however, the temperature drops too
low, trouble is liable to be met with, by the soap solidifying too
quickly in the frames.

When the crutching is completed, the soap is allowed to drop into frames
through the valve at the bottom of the crutcher and rapidly crutched by
the hand in the frames to prevent large air spaces and then allowed to
cool. It is an improvement to jolt the frames as they are drawn away as
this tends to make the larger air bubbles float to the surface and thus
reduce the quantity of waste. When the soap has cooled, the frame is
stripped and the soap slabbed as usual. At this point a layer of
considerable depth of spongy soap will be found to have formed. This of
course must be cut away and returned to the kettle. The last few slabs
are also often rejected, inasmuch as the weight of the soap above them
has forced out so much of the air that the soap no longer floats. As a
fair average it may be estimated that not more than 50 to 60 per cent.
of the soap in the kettle will come out as finished cakes. the
remaining 40 to 50 per cent. being constituted by the heavy crust in the
kettle, the spongy tops, the bottom slabs and scrapings. This soap is of
course reboiled and consequently not lost, but the actual cakes obtained
are produced at a cost of practically double labor.

It is advisable to add a small quantity of soap blue color to the mass
while crutching to neutralize the yellowish tint a floating soap is
liable to have.

Some manufacturers add a percentage of carbonate of soda, about 3 per
cent., to prevent the soap from shrinking. Floating soap may also be
loaded with sodium silicate to the extent of about 5 per cent.


TOILET SOAP.

It is not a simple matter to differentiate between toilet soaps and
various other soaps, because numerous soaps are adaptable to toilet
purposes. While some soaps of this variety are manufactured by the cold
made or semi-boiled process, and not milled, the consumer has become
accustomed to a milled soap for general toilet use.

The toilet base most extensively employed is a tallow and cocoanut base
made as a full boiled settled soap. The manufacture of this base has
already been outlined and really needs no further comment except that it
is to be remembered that a suitable toilet soap should contain no great
excess of free alkali which is injurious to the skin. Cochin cocoanut
oil is preferable to the Ceylon cocoanut oil or palm kernel oil, to use
in conjunction with the tallow, which should be a good grade and color
if a white piece of goods is desired. The percentage of cocoanut oil may
be anywhere from 10 to 25 per cent., depending upon the kind of lather
required, it being remembered that cocoanut oil increases the lathering
power of the soap.

In addition to a tallow base, numerous other oils are used in the
manufacture of toilet soaps, especially palm oil, palm kernel oil, olive
oil and olive oil foots, and to a much less extent arachis or peanut
oil, sesame oil and poppy seed oil, oils of the class of cottonseed,
corn and soya bean oils are not adapted to manufacturing a milled soap,
as they form yellow spots in a finished cake of soap which has been kept
a short time.

Palm oil, especially the Lagos oil, is much used in making a palm base.
As has already been stated, the oil is bleached before saponification. A
palm base has a yellowish color, a sweetish odor, and a small quantity
added to a tallow base naturally aids the perfume. It is especially good
for a violet soap. The peculiarity of a palm oil base is that this oil
makes a short soap. By the addition of some tallow or twenty to
twenty-five per cent. of cocoanut oil, or both, this objection is
overcome. It is a good plan in using a straight palm base to add a
proportion of yellow color to hold the yellowish tint of this soap, as a
soap made from this oil continues bleaching upon exposure to air and
light.

Olive oil and olive oil foots are used most extensively in the
manufacture of castile soaps. The peculiarity of an olive oil soap is
that it makes a very slimy lather, and like palm oil gives the soap a
characteristic odor. An olive oil soap is usually considered to be a
very neutral soap and may readily be superfatted. Much olive oil soap is
used in bars or slabs as an unmilled soap and it is often made by the
cold process. Peanut oil or sesame and poppy seed oil often replaces
olive oil, as they form a similar soap to olive oil.

In the manufacture of a toilet soap it is hardly practical to lay down a
definite plan for the various bases to be made. From the combination of
tallow, palm oil, cocoanut oil, palm kernel oil, olive oil and olive oil
foots, a great many bases of different proportions might be given. The
simplest method is to make a tallow base, a palm base and an olive oil
base. Then from these it is an easy matter to weigh out any proportion
of these soap bases and obtain the proper mixture in the mill. If,
however, as is often the case, a large quantity of soap base of certain
proportions of these, four or even more of these fats and oils is
required, it is not only more economical to stock the kettle with the
correct proportion of these oils, but a more thorough mixture is thus
obtained by saponifying these in the kettle. In view of the fact that it
is really a question for the manufacturer to decide for himself what
combination of oils he desires for a particular soap we will simply
outline a few typical toilet soap bases in their simplest combination.
It is understood that these soaps are suitable for milled soaps and are
to be made as fully boiled settled soaps. Palm kernel oil may be
substituted for cocoanut oil in all cases.


TALLOW BASE.

    Tallow                       75-90 parts
    Cocoanut oil                 25-10 parts


PALM BASE.

    Bleached Lagos palm oil      75-80 parts
    Cocoanut oil                 25-20 parts

                or

    Tallow                          30 parts
    Palm oil                        60 parts
    Cocoanut oil                    10 parts


OLIVE OIL BASE (WHITE).

    Olive oil                    75-90 parts
    Cocoanut oil                 25-10 parts

                  or

    Olive oil                    40 parts
    Tallow                       40 parts
    Cocoanut                     20 parts

Where a green olive oil base is desired, olive oil foots are substituted
for the olive oil. Peanut oil may replace the olive oil or part of it,
the same being true of sesame oil and poppy seed oil.


PALM AND OLIVE BASE.

    Palm oil                     50 parts
    Olive oil                    30 parts
    Cocoanut oil                 20 parts

                  or

    Palm oil                     20 parts
    Olive oil                    10 parts
    Tallow                       50 parts
    Cocoanut oil                 20 parts


CHEAPER TOILET SOAPS.

It is often necessary to manufacture a cheaper grade of soap for toilet
purposes to meet the demand of a certain class of trade as well as for
export. To accomplish this it is of course necessary to produce a very
inferior product and run down the percentage of fatty acids contained in
the soaps by the addition of fillers or to use cheaper oils in
manufacturing. The most simple method of filling a soap is to load it at
the mill with some substance much less expensive than the soap itself.
Many of the cheaper toilet soaps, however, are not milled and it is,
therefore, necessary to follow out some other procedure.

Milled soaps, as has just been stated, are loaded at the mill. The
consumers of cheaper toilet soaps in this country are accustomed to a
milled soap and this grade of soap for home consumption is very often
filled with numerous substances, but most generally by adding starch
and talc. The addition of such materials of course later exhibit
themselves by imparting to the cake of soap a dead appearance. Talc is
more readily detected in the soap than starch by washing with it, as
talc is insoluble and imparts a roughness to the soap, like sand or
pumice, as the soap wears down. It may readily be added to 20 per cent.
by weight. Starch is to be preferred to talc, in loading a soap, as it
is not so readily noticeable in washing. It leaves the cake itself
absolutely smooth although the lather formed is more shiny. This
substance may be employed to as high a percentage as one-third the
weight of the soap. It is, of course, possible to cheapen the best soap
base by this method and the price may be further lowered by using the
less expensive oils and fats to make the soap base.


RUN AND GLUED UP SOAPS.

A very cheap grade of soap may be made by making a run soap and adding
the filler e. g. sodium silicate in the kettle during saponification.
The percentage of fatty acids may be brought down to 10 per cent.,
although of course a soap of this type shrinks a whole lot upon
exposure.

In making a "glued up" soap the procedure is the same for making the
soap itself as with a settled soap, except that the soap is finished
"curd" and later filled in the crutcher. The percentage of fatty acids
in a soap of this type is seldom below 50 per cent.

The method of "gluing up" a soap is best illustrated by a typical soap
of this character in which the kettle is charged with the following
stock.

    Bleached palm oil                          5 parts
    Distilled grease                           2   "
    Cotton oil foots stock, 63% fatty acid     1   "
    Rosin                                      4   "

The palm oil is first run into the kettle, saponified and washed to
extract any glycerine, then the rest of the fats and finally the rosin.
The soap is then finished and settled as with a boiled settled soap. To
assure success it is absolutely necessary that the soap settle as long a
period as possible, or until the temperature is about 150 degs. F. The
ideal temperature for carrying out the "gluing up" process is 140 degs.
F., as at a lower temperature than this the soap is liable to cool too
quickly and not be thoroughly glued up. A higher temperature than 150
degs. F. causes delay in that the soap does not properly take the filler
at a higher temperature and the soap must be kept in the crutcher until
the temperature drops to the right point.

The soap is run into the crutcher and the percentage of fatty acids run
down to 50-55 per cent. with one of the following mixtures:

    Sodium silicate, 59-1/2° B.     1 part
    Potassium carbonate, 51° B.     1  "

                    or

    Sodium silicate, 59-1/2° B.     1 part
    Potassium carbonate, 51° B.     1  "
    Sodium sulfate, 28° B.          1  "

From 230 to 300 pounds of either of these mixtures are required for a
crutcher holding 2,600 pounds of soap.

The crutching is continued until the mass is well "spiked," that is to
say, a freshly broken surface of the soap, as the crutcher blade is
jerked away, stands up like shattered sheets in triangular form
[Transcriber's note: three triangles]), which retain their shape
perfectly. When this condition is realized the soap is run into frames
which are carefully crutched by hand to remove any air spaces. The
surface of the soap is then smoothed down and heaped up in the center.
After standing a day to contract, the surface is again leveled and a
snugly-fitting board placed on the top of the soap upon which a weight
is placed or upon which the workman treads and stamps until the surface
is flat, thus assuring the further removal of air spaces. The soap
remains in the frame from six to eight days and is then slabbed, barred
and pressed by the usual method employed for soaps thus handled without
milling.

In a soap of this nature no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to
the quantity of solution to be used for "gluing up" or the strength of
the solution. In a soap of the type described the most satisfactory
appearing cake will be obtained from a soap containing 58 per cent.
fatty acids. That is to say, about 8 per cent. to 10 per cent. filling
solution is added per hundred pounds of soap. The filling solutions
given are very satisfactory. Carbonate of soda should be avoided in
connection with sodium silicate as the property of efflorescing on the
surface of the finished cake after a short time will prove detrimental.
To assure successful gluing up it is advisable to experiment upon a
small scale to determine the exact extent to which the filling solution
should be diluted. Various proportions of water are added to a certain
quantity of the filled soap. After the soap has been filled in a small
receptacle a sample is taken and rubbed between the fingers. If the
freshly exposed surface is smooth and glossy, the filling solution is
weak enough, if rough it is too strong. It is of course understood that
the temperature must be correct, 140 degs. to 150 degs. F., or the soap
will be rough. By this means the operator can readily judge the correct
strength of his filling solution. When properly carried out a perfectly
satisfactory soap is obtained.


CURD SOAP.

The object of a soap which is finished "curd" or grained, is to obtain a
harder piece of goods from low titer fat or to increase the percentage
of fatty acids in the finished soap. This is still another method of
producing a cheap grade of soap as by its adoption the cheaper oils and
fats may be used to obtain a firm piece of soap.

A typical charge for curd soap is:

    Red oil        63 parts
    Tallow         10  "
    Rosin          27  "

Cotton seed foots may be employed in place of red oil and a tallow of
too high titer is not suitable for this kind of soap.

The red oil and tallow are first saponified with 15 degs. B. lye, boiler
pressure 80-90 pounds, 18 degs. B. lye for lower steam pressure, and two
washings given to extract the glycerine. The rosin is added at the
strengthening change and at the finish the soap is "pitched," that is to
say, the soap is settled over night only. The next day the lyes are
drawn off and a portion of the nigre pumped to another kettle which
prevents later streaking of the soap. The soap is then boiled with 18
degs. B. lye as with another strengthening change under closed steam.
Salt brine or "pickle," 15 degs. B. is then added and the mass boiled
with closed steam until the brine reaches a density of 18 degs. B. and
the kettle pumped the next day. A soap of this type requires either hand
or power crutching to assure homogeneity and prevention of streaks. To
obviate any air spaces it is advisable to place over the top of the
frame a tightly-fitted board which is heavily weighted down. This soap
is also pressed without any milling.


COLD MADE TOILET SOAPS.

Comparatively little toilet soap is made by the cold or semi-boiled
processes. While these are the simplest methods of manufacturing soaps
the drawbacks of using them are numerous and only in a few cases are
they very extensively employed. To make a toilet soap by the cold
process a combination of good grade tallow and cocoanut oil is required.
It requires 50 per cent. by weight of 36 degs. B. lye to saponify a
given weight of tallow and 50 per cent. of 38 degs. B. lye for cocoanut
oil. The lyes are used full strength or may be reduced slightly with
water and the method of procedure is the same as already given in the
general directions for cold made soaps.

Cold made soaps are readily filled with sodium silicate which is added
at the same time the stock is put into the crutcher. In adding the
silicate it is necessary to add additional lye to that required for
saponifying the fats, about 20 per cent. of 36 degs. B. lye is the
proper amount. There is of course a certain amount of shrinking due to
the addition of this filler and the finished cake is exceedingly hard,
yet the author has seen a good looking cake of cheap soap made from as
high a proportion as 420 parts of tallow to 600 parts of silicate.

Cold made soaps are usually pressed without milling, although it is
readily feasible to mill a cold made soap provided it is not a filled
soap such as has just been described.


PERFUMING AND COLORING TOILET SOAPS.

Equally important as the soap itself or even to a greater extent is the
perfume of a toilet soap. A prominent manufacturer recently made the
statement, which is often the truth, that it makes no difference to the
public what kind of soap you give them, as long as you put plenty of
odor into it. The perfuming of soaps is an art in itself and a subject
to be treated by one versed in this particular branch. We can only take
into account the importance of the perfume as related to toilet soap
not only, but the necessity of adding a certain proportion of the
cheaper products of odoriferous nature to laundry soap to cover and
disguise the odor of even this type of soap.

The price of a cake of toilet soap to a great extent depends upon the
perfume, and the manufacturer should aim to give the best possible
perfume for a certain price. He should not allow his personal likes or
dislikes to enter into the judgment of whether an odor is good or not,
but submit it to a number of persons to obtain the concensus of opinion.
In giving or selling a piece of soap to the consumer, it is second
nature for him to smell it, and in the great majority of cases his
opinion is formed not from any quality the soap itself may have during
use, but from the odor. This only emphasizes the fact that the perfume
must be pleasing, not to one person, but to the majority, and many
brands owe their popularity to nothing more than the enticing perfume.

Perfuming of soap is closely allied to the soap making industry, but as
stated a branch in itself. It is, therefore, not our purpose to give
numerous formulae of how to perfume a soap, but rather to advise to go
for information to some one who thoroughly understands the
characteristics of the numerous essential oils and synthetics and give
positive information for the particular odor desired. Under no
circumstances is it advisable to purchase a perfume already compounded,
but since all perfumes are a blend of several or many essential oils and
synthetics, it is a more positive assurance of obtaining what is
desired, by purchasing the straight oils and blending or mixing them as
one desires.

The perfume is added to a milled soap just before the milling process in
the proper proportion per hundred pounds of soap. In cold made or
unmilled soaps it is added in the crutcher while the soap is still hot.
By this method, of course, a proportion of the perfume is lost due to
its being more or less volatile.


COLORING SOAP.

While much toilet soap is white or natural in color, many soaps are also
artificially colored. The soap colors used for this purpose are mostly
aniline dyestuffs. The price of these dyestuffs is no criterion as to
their quality, as the price is usually regulated by the addition of some
inert, water soluble substance like common salt or sugar.

The main properties that a dyestuff suitable for producing a colored
soap should have are fastness to light and to alkali. They should
further be of such a type that the color does not come off and stain a
wash cloth or the hands when the soap is used and should be soluble in
water. Under no circumstances is it advisable to add these in such a
quantity that the lather produced in the soap is colored. It is
customary to first dissolve the dye in hot water as a standardized
solution. This can then be measured out in a graduate and added to the
soap the same time as the perfume is put in. About one part of color to
fifty parts of water is the proper proportion to obtain a perfect
solution, though this is by no means fixed. In making up a solution thus
it is an improvement to add to the same about one-half of one per cent.
of an alkali either as the hydroxide or carbonate. Then, if there is any
possibility of change of color due to alkalinity of the soap, it will
exhibit itself before the color is added.

A particularly difficult shade to obtain is a purple, as there is up to
the present time no purplish aniline color known which is fast to light.
Very good results in soap may be obtained by mixing a fast blue, as
ultramarine or cobalt blue, with a red as rhodamine or eosine.

Inasmuch as the colors for soap have been carefully tested by most of
the dyestuff manufacturers, and their information, usually reliable, is
open to any one desiring to know about a color for soap, it is better to
depend upon their experience with colors after having satisfied one's
self that a color is what it is represented for a particular shade, than
to experiment with the numerous colors one's self.


MEDICINAL SOAPS.

Soap is often used for the conveyance of various medicants, antiseptics
or other material presumably beneficial for treatment of skin diseases.
While soap is an ideal medium for the carrying of such materials, it is
an unfortunate condition that when incorporated with the soap, all but a
very few of the numerous substances thus employed lose their medicinal
properties and effectiveness for curing skin disorders, as well as any
antiseptic value the substance may have. Soap is of such a nature
chemically that many of the substances used for skin troubles are either
entirely decomposed or altered to such an extent so as to impair their
therapeutic value. Thus many of the claims made for various medicated
soaps fall flat, and really have no more antiseptic or therapeutic merit
than ordinary soap which in itself has certain germicidal and cleaning
value.

In medicating a soap the material used for this purpose is usually added
at the mill. A tallow and cocoanut oil base is best adapted for a soap
of this type. The public have been educated more or less to the use of
colored soap to accentuate its medicinal value, and green is undoubtedly
the most popular shade. This inference, however, is by no means true for
all soaps of this character. Possibly the best method of arranging
these soaps is briefly to outline some medicinal soaps.


SULPHUR SOAPS.

The best known sulphur soaps contain anywhere from one to 20 per cent.
of flowers of sulphur. Other soaps contain either organic or inorganic
sulphur compounds.


TAR SOAP.

The tar used in the manufacturing of tar soap is obtained by the
destructive distillation of wood, the pine tar being the most
extensively employed. While the different wood tars contain numerous
aromatic compounds, such as phenols, phenyl oxides, terpenes and organic
acids, these are present in such a slight proportion so as to render
their effectiveness practically useless. It has, therefore, been tried
to use these various compounds contained in the tar themselves to make
tar soap really effective, yet tar is so cheap a substance that it is
usually the substance used for medicating a tar soap. About 10 per cent.
of tar is usually added to the soap with 2 ounces of lamp black per
hundred pounds of soap.


SOAPS CONTAINING PHENOLS.

Phenol (Carbolic Acid) is most extensively used in soaps of this kind,
which are called carbolic soaps. Carbolic soaps are generally colored
green and contain from 1 to 5 per cent. phenol crystals.

The cresols are also extensively used for making soaps named carbolic.
These substances impart more odor to the soap and really have more
disinfecting powers than phenol when incorporated with soap.

Other soaps, containing the phenol group, which are well known are
resorcinol soap, salol soap, thymol soap, naphthol soap, etc. From one
to five per cent of the compound after which the soap is named is
usually incorporated with the soap.


PEROXIDE SOAP.

Hydrogen peroxide in itself is an excellent disinfectant. It loses all
its medicinal value, however, when added to the soap. To overcome this
objection various metallic peroxides are added to the soap, as sodium
peroxide, zinc peroxide and barium peroxide. These generate hydrogen
peroxide by the addition of water. Sodium perborate is also used in
peroxide soaps, as this substance is decomposed by water into hydrogen
peroxide and sodium metaborate.


MERCURY SOAPS.

Mercuric chloride (corrosive sublimate) is most extensively used for the
production of mercury soaps. Because of its extremely poisonous
properties care should be taken in using it. Since it really eventually
loses any antiseptic value in the soap through forming an insoluble
mercury soap it might better be omitted entirely.


LESS IMPORTANT MEDICINAL SOAPS.

While the above mentioned soaps are probably the best known medicated
soaps, there are numerous other soaps which may be classed under these
kinds of soaps. Thus we have cold cream soap, which can be made by
adding Russian Mineral Oil, 1 to 5 per cent., to the soap; witch hazel
soap, made by the addition of extract of witch hazel; iodine soap, made
by adding iodine or iodoform; formaldehyde soap, made by adding
formaldehyde; tannin soaps, made by adding tannin. In fact, there have
been incorporated in soap so great a number of substances that the list
might be greatly enlarged.

Medicated soaps are not only used in solid form, but in powder, paste
and liquid soap as well. The only difference in a soap like those just
referred to is that the medicant is incorporated with these forms of
soaps as convenience directs.


CASTILE SOAP.

A pure castile soap should be made from olive oil. This, however, is not
always the case, as a number of oils as well as tallow are used to
adulterate this oil to cheapen it, and there are even some soaps called
castile which contain no olive oil at all. Most of the pure castile soap
used in this country is imported, as it is a difficult matter for the
American manufacturer to compete with the pure imported castile soap,
since both labor and oil itself are so much cheaper in the vicinities of
Europe where this oil is produced, that this advantage is more than
compensated by the carrying and custom charges by importing the castile
soap.

Castile soap may be made either by the full boiled or cold process.
There are numerous grades of olive oil, and those used for soap making
are denatured to lower the duty charges. Olive oil makes a hard white
soap, usually sold in bars, and olive oil foots a green soap, due to the
coloring matter contained in this oil.

To make a boiled castile soap, a composition of 10 per cent. Cochin
cocoanut oil and 90 per cent. olive oil may be used. To cheapen this,
peanut oil (Arachis oil) may entirely replace the olive oil, or about 20
per cent. of corn or soya bean oil may be added. The oils are saponified
as usual in making a settled soap and to prevent rancidity the soap is
boiled near the finish for some time in the closed state with
sufficient excess of alkali to give it a sharp taste, then grained with
lye, the lye drawn off, closed with water and then grained with salt.
This process is repeated until the desired strength is reached. The last
graining should not be too great, and on the last change the soap should
not be thinned out, as it will contain too great a quantity of water
when slabbed.

In making a cold castile soap the usual method is pursued as already
directed under cold made soap. When the soap is taken from the crutcher
it is advisable, however, to keep the soap in the frame well covered to
assure complete saponification. Some manufacturers use very small frames
which are placed into compartments, well insulated to retain heat.
Several formulae for cold made castile soaps, follow. It may be noted
that some of these contain practically no olive oil.

                 I

    Olive oil                        2030
    Palm kernel                       674
    Soda lye, 35 per cent. B.        1506

                 II

    Olive oil                        2030
    Cochin cocoanut oil               674
    Soda lye, 36 per cent. B.        1523
    Sodium Silicate                    82

                 III

    Palm kernel oil                  1578
    Tallow                            940
    Olive oil                           7
    Sodium silicate, 20 per cent.     190
    Soda lye, 36 per cent. B.        1507

                 IV

    Olive oil (yellow)               1000
    Soda lye, 37 per cent. B.         500

                 V

    Olive oil                          90
                   or
    Palm kernel            }           10
    Cochin or cocoanut oil }           10
    Lye, 37 per cent. B.               51

If any of the soaps containing a high proportion of cocoanut oil are
boiled the soap will float. It is therefore necessary to keep the
temperature as low as possible.


ESCHWEGER SOAP (BLUE MOTTLED).

Eschweger soap is a colored mottled or marbled soap made to a very
slight extent in this country. Inasmuch as it has been introduced to the
export trade, it is made for this purpose by some manufacturers. A high
percentage of cocoanut oil is usually used together with tallow and
grease. About one-third of each is a typical formula. In a soap of this
character the fact that cocoanut oil soap takes up a large quantity of
water and salts of various kinds and is difficult to salt out is made
use of. The tallow and grease are first saponified as usual, then the
cocoanut oil is pumped and saponified. When the saponification is nearly
completed either silicate or carbonate of soda or common salt are added
to make the soap "short" so as to form the mottle. The finishing of a
soap of this type can only be gained by practice and it is rather
difficult to explain the exact appearance of the kettle at this stage.
The surface of the soap should be bright and lustrous with the steam
escaping in numerous places in rose-like formation. A sample on the
trowel should have a slight sharpness to the tongue and be plastic. When
the soap slides from the trowel it should break short. When the soap has
reached this stage the desired coloring matter, usually ultramarine, is
added to the soap either in the kettle or crutcher and the soap framed.
The yield is 200-215 pounds per hundred pounds of stock.

Several modifications of this general method for Eschweger soap are used
by adopting the half boiled or cold process.


TRANSPARENT SOAP.

Transparent soap is really not a most desirable soap for toilet
purposes, as it contains an excess of free alkali. It has, nevertheless,
met with public approval because of the fact it is novel in being
transparent. Except for this fact very little merit can be claimed for a
soap of this kind.

The transparency of soap is generally due to the presence of alcohol,
sugar or glycerine in the soap when it is made. It is very essential in
a soap of this character, where lightness and clearness of color are
desired, that the material for making the soap be carefully selected as
to color and purity. The perfumes also play an important part in the
color of the soap and many of the tinctures, balsams and infusions used
in perfuming soap may eventually cause trouble by spotting. If the soap
is artificially colored, which is almost always the case, the dyestuffs
used for this purpose should have careful attention and only those
should be used which are known to resist the action of alkalis. Where
rosin is used this product must be of the better grade. Distilled water
is always preferable for use in transparent soap. The government permits
the use of a specially denatured alcohol. This alcohol is not taxed and
consists of grain (ethyl) alcohol denatured with 5 per cent. wood
(methyl) alcohol. Some soapmakers prefer to use a more expensive refined
methyl alcohol, but outside of adding to the cost of the soap, there is
no particular advantage. The glycerine should be chemically pure. As to
the oils and fats these should be low in acid and of good color. Under
no circumstances should the crutcher or kettle in which the soap is made
be rusty or unclean in any way. For a light soap enameled utensils are
to be preferred.

To obtain transparency in soap the following general methods may be
given.

1. Where the transparency is due to sugar.

2. Where alcohol and glycerine produce transparency.

3. Where (1) or (2) is supplemented by the use of castor oil.

4. Where transparency depends upon the percentage of fatty acid in a
soap and the number of times the soap is milled.

Under the first method at least 25 per cent. of the charge should be
cocoanut oil, the other constituent being tallow or any fat or oil
capable of giving a sufficiently hard soap. The soap is boiled and
finished as usual, then run to the crutcher to be mixed with a strong
cane sugar solution, containing 10-20 per cent. sugar of the weight of
the soap. The sugar is dissolved in its own weight of water and the
solution heated to 175 degs. F. before being very slowly added to the
soap. As the water evaporates, soaps of this type show spots due to the
sugar thus being thrown out of solution.

Transparent soap made under the second method may be saponified as usual
and consist of any good toilet base. The soap is run to the crutcher and
mixed with 95 per cent. alcohol in the proportion of one part alcohol to
two parts of fatty acid contained in the soap together with glycerine in
the same proportion.

By the third method castor oil alone may be used to make the soap or
added to any of the above bases up to 33-1/3 per cent. of the charge. If
castor oil only is used, but 2 per cent. or 3 per cent. of sugar is
required.

In the last method a combination of 80 per cent. tallow, very low in
free acid, 20 per cent. cocoanut oil and 5 per cent. W. W. rosin is a
suitable charge. The saponification and finishing is carried out as with
a full boiled soap. The soap is then placed into a jacketed vessel,
provided with dry-steam coils, by which the excess water is evaporated
from the soap until it contains 73 per cent. fatty acids. When the thick
mass reaches this stage it is framed and when cool is suitable for
obtaining a semi transparency which now depends upon the number of times
the soap is milled, it being, of course, inferred that no solid matter
of any sort be added to the soap.


COLD MADE TRANSPARENT SOAP.

While transparent soaps may be made by the above general methods they
are usually made by the semi-boiled or cold process. By this process a
more satisfactory soap is obtained and it is more simple to carry out. A
detailed description of this method is best and most easily given by
using a typical formula.

    Charge:

      Tallow                       193-1/2 lbs.
      Cochin Cocoanut Oil          169-1/2 "
      Castor Oil                    89-1/2 "
      Soda Ash                       7-3/4 "
      Soda Lye, 36 degs. B.        256     "
      Sugar (Cane)                 198     "
      Alcohol                      126     "
      Water (Distilled)             80     "

To proceed, first place into a crutcher or jacketed kettle the oils and
fat and heat to 140 degs. F. Then add the soda ash dissolved in about 30
pounds of the water, after which the lye is added and the mass stirred
until a finger or stick run over the surface leaves an imprint. Where
the soap has reached this stage, it is well covered and allowed to stand
about two hours or until it bulges in the center, after which the rest
of the water which should contain no lime or other mineral substance and
which is preferably distilled water, is added. The sugar is then slowly
shoveled in while the mass is stirring and finally the alcohol is poured
in. The heat is then increased to 160 degs. F. by dry steam and the soap
crutched until dissolved. Under no circumstances should any soap be
allowed to remain above the surface of the mass on the sides of the
mixer. This crutching operation consumes about one hour, and when
finished the soap should stand in the vessel about half an hour when a
small sample is taken out to cool. This sample should be clear and show
an excess of alkali. If it is not clear more alcohol is added, if not of
sufficient strength more lye put in until the desired condition is
reached. The perfume and color are now added.

The soap is then framed and allowed to set after which it is cut,
allowed to dry slightly and then pressed. To obtain a polished cake
transparent soaps are often planed before pressing and after pressing
polished with a soft cloth, dampened with alcohol. Instead of framing
this soap, it is sometimes "tubed," that is to say, the soap from the
crutcher is run into specially constructed tubes of a shape near that of
the desired cake and allowed to cool, after which it is cut and pressed.
All scraps are returned to the crutcher, but in so doing the soap is
slightly darkened in color. It is advisable to expose a finished cake of
transparent soap to the air for some time as by so doing it becomes
clearer.

Other formulae for cold made transparent soaps made as just outlined
follow:

                      I.
    Bleached Tallow                134 lbs.
    Cochin Cocoanut Oil             88  "
    Castor Oil                      20  "
    W. W. Rosin                      7  "
    Cane Sugar                      64  "
    Water                           32  "
    Glycerine                       34  "
    Soda Lye, 38 degs. B.          135  "
    Alcohol                         16 gal.

                     II.
    Tallow                         211   lbs.
    Cochin Cocoanut Oil            185     "
    Castor Oil                      97-1/2 "
    Soda Ash                         8-1/2 "
    Water                          106     "
    Soda Lye, 38 degs. B.          279     "
    Sugar                          216     "
    Alcohol                        137     "

                     III.
    Castor Oil                      60    lbs.
    Cochin Cocoanut Oil            195     "
    Tallow                         120     "
    Alcohol                        115     "
    Sugar                           90     "
    Water                           53     "
    Glycerine                       53     "
    Soda Lye, 38 degs. B.          205-1/2 "

                     IV.
    Tallow                         100 lbs.
    Cochin Cocoanut Oil            100  "
    Castor Oil                      60  "
    Glycerine                       20  "
    Rosin, W. W.                    20  "
    Sugar                           40  "
    Water                           50  "
    Soda Lye, 36 degs. B.          164  "
    Alcohol                          8 gal.

                      V.
    Tallow                         174 lbs.
    Cocoanut Oil                   114  "
    Soda Lye, 38 degs. B.          170  "
    Sugar                           80  "
    Water                           72  "
    Alcohol                         16 gal.

Rosin may be added in this formula up to 20 per cent. of fats used and
the tallow cut down correspondingly.


SHAVING SOAPS.

The requirements of a shaving soap are somewhat different than those of
other soaps. To be a good shaving soap the lather produced therefrom
must be heavy, creamy, but not gummy, and remain moist when formed on
the face. The soap itself should be of a soft consistency so as to
readily adhere to the face when used in stick form. It should
furthermore be neutral or nearly so to prevent the alkali from smarting
during shaving.

Shaving soap is made in the form of a stick, and a tablet for use in the
shaving mug. Some shavers prefer to have the soap as a powder or cream,
which are claimed to be more convenient methods of shaving. While a
liquid shaving soap is not as well known because it has not yet become
popular, some soap for shaving is made in this form.

Formerly shaving soap was extensively made from a charge of about 80
parts tallow and 20 parts cocoanut oil as a boiled settled soap, but
either making the strengthening change with potash lye or using potash
lye in saponifying the stock and graining with salt. Soaps for shaving
made in this manner are very unsatisfactory, as they do not produce a
sufficiently thick or lasting lather and discolor very materially upon
ageing. Potassium stearate forms an ideal lather for shaving, but
readily hardens and hence needs some of the softer oils, or glycerine
incorporated with it to form a satisfactory soap for shaving.

The selection of materials for making a shaving soap is important. The
tallow used should be white and of high titer. Cochin cocoanut oil is to
be preferred to the other kinds, and the alkalis should be the best for
technical use that can be purchased--76 per cent. caustic soda and 88-92
per cent. caustic potash are suitable. By the use of stearic acid it is
a simple matter to reach the neutral point which can be carefully
approximated.

The following are shaving soap formulae which have been found to give
good satisfaction:

                      I.       lbs.
    Tallow                         360
    Stearic acid                    40
    Soda lye, 41° B.               147
    Potash lye, 34° B.              87
    Water                           32
    Gum tragacanth                   1

                     II.       lbs.
    Tallow                         282
    Cocoanut oil                    60
    Stearic acid                    50
    Bayberry wax                    18
    Soda lye, 41° B.               147
    Potash lye, 34° B.              90
    Water                           32

                     III.      lbs.
    Tallow                         400
    Cocoanut oil                   176
    Stearic acid                   415
    Caustic soda, 40° B.           182
    Caustic potash, 38° B.         108

To proceed, first run into the crutcher the tallow, cocoanut oil and
bayberry wax when used, and bring the temperature of the mass up to
140°-160° F. by dry steam. Then add the caustic soda lye and keep on
heat with occasional mixing until it is all taken up. When this stage is
reached gradually add all but about 5 per cent. of the potash lye, and
complete the saponification. This point having been reached, the heat is
turned off; the crutcher is run and the stearic acid, previously melted
by dry steam in a lead-lined or enameled vessel, is run in in a
continuous stream and the crutching continued for fifteen minutes to
half an hour. Samples are taken at this time, cooled and tested by
alcoholic phenolphthalein solution. If too alkaline more stearic acid is
added, if too acid more potash lye from that previously reserved. After
each addition of lye or stearic acid the mass is crutched from 10 to 15
minutes longer, another sample is taken, cooled and again tested. When
the phenolphthalein shows a very light pink after several minutes, the
soap is practically neutral, although at this point one can better judge
by dissolving a sample in hot neutralized alcohol made by putting into
the alcohol a few drops of phenolphthalein, and then adding weak alkali
drop by drop from a burette until a slight pink, not yellow, tint is
obtained, and noting the color of the solution. The solution should show
a very light pink when the soap is properly neutralized. When this stage
is arrived at the gum tragacanth, previously softened in water, is
crutched in if it is to be added. The soap is then framed, stripped in
three or four days, dried and milled.

The formulae as given are for shaving sticks, and do not readily press
unless thoroughly dried. A more satisfactory result is obtained by
adding at the mill 25 per cent. of white tallow base to obtain a
satisfactory mug soap.


SHAVING POWDER.

Shaving powder differs from the soaps just described in being
pulverized, usually adding up to 5 per cent. starch to prevent caking.
Any of the above soaps, dried bone dry, with or without the addition of
tallow base make a satisfactory powder for shaving.


SHAVING CREAM.

Shaving cream is now a very popular shaving medium due to the rapidity
and convenience with which one can shave by the use of this product.
Formerly shaving cream was made from the liquid oils like olive oil and
a soft fat like lard, together with cocoanut oil. Now, however, most of
the popular shaving creams are made from stearic acid and cocoanut oil,
as a far superior product is obtained by the use of these substances. By
using these a more satisfactory cream is obtained, and it is far more
convenient to make. The lather also produced therefrom is more suitable
for shaving, being thick, creamy and remaining moist.

A few typical formulae for shaving creams of this type are as follows:

                          I.       lbs.
    Cochin cocoanut oil             26
    Stearic acid                   165
    Caustic potash lye, 50° B.      69
    Glycerine C. P.                 76
    Water                           38

                          II.      lbs.
    Cochin cocoanut oil             18
    Stearic acid                    73
    Caustic potash lye, 39° B.      54
    Glycerine                       33
    Water                           27

                         III.      lbs.
    Cochin cocoanut oil             18
    Stearic acid                    73
    Caustic potash lye, 39° B.      54
    Glycerine                       20
    Water                           40

                         and       lbs.

    Stearic acid                    60
    Glycerine C. P.                 85
    Water                          165
    Sodium carbonate                50
    Borax                            1

To make a shaving cream by Formula I or II, the cocoanut oil and
glycerine are first put into a suitable mixing apparatus or crutcher,
and heated to 120° F. A part or all the potash lye is then added and the
cocoanut oil saponified. The rest of the potash lye and the water are
then added, and with the mixer running the stearic acid, previously
melted in a lead-lined or enameled vessel, is then poured in in a stream
and the mass stirred until smooth, care being exercised not to aerate it
too much. The cream is then tested for alkalinity, the best method being
by that described under shaving soap, in which the sample is dissolved
in alcohol. Because of the large quantity of water present,
phenolphthalein is unsatisfactory, as dissociation of the soap may show
a pink indication in spite of the fact the mass is on the acid side. For
a quick method of testing the bite on the tongue is a satisfactory
criterion. If a cooled sample bites the tongue more stearic acid is
added until there is a 3% excess of this. When the proper neutralization
has taken place the cream is perfumed and framed in a special frame, or
it may be allowed to cool in the mixer and perfumed the next day. When
cool the cream is strained, or put through an ointment mill, after which
it is ready to fill into tubes.

The procedure for the first part of Formula III is the same as that just
given. The second part of the formula is made the same as a vanishing
cream for toilet purposes. To make this, first melt the stearic acid as
already directed. Dissolve the sodium carbonate and borax in water and
when dissolved add the glycerine and stir. Then heat this solution to
about 100°-120° F. and while stirring in a suitable mixing machine into
which this solution has been poured after being heated, or better still
in which it has been heated by dry steam, add the stearic acid. Continue
mixing until smooth and then allow to cool, or run into frames to cool.

When the shaving cream and vanishing cream are both cool, they are mixed
in the proportion of one of the former to two of the latter. It is
claimed that in thus making a shaving cream a smoother product is
obtained, although it may be said that the vanishing cream is merely a
soft soap and the ultimate result is the same as though the various
ingredients were added in one operation, rather than making two separate
products and then mixing them, thereby considerably increasing the cost
of manufacture.


PUMICE OR SAND SOAPS.

Pumice and sand are at times added to soap to aid in the removal of dirt
in cleansing the hands. In some cases these soaps are made in the form
of a cake, in others they are sold in cans in the form of a paste.

A hand paste is usually made by merely dissolving ordinary tallow base
in two or three times its weight of hot water and mixing in the desired
quantity of pumice or sand and in some instances adding a little
glycerine to keep it soft or a solvent of some kind for grease. It may
also be made by directly incorporating any of these in a potash soap.

A cold made or semi-boiled cocoanut or palm kernel oil soap is the base
used to add the pumice or sand to in making a cake soap of this sort.
The following formulae serve as a guide for these soaps.

                       I.

    Palm Kernel or Ceylon Cocoanut Oil      705 lbs.
    Pumice (Powdered)                       281 "
    Soda Lye, 38° B.                        378 "

                      II.

    Cocoanut Oil                            100 "
    Soda Lye, 38° B.                         55 "
    Water                                     6 "
    Silver Sand (fine)                       60 "

To proceed place the oil in a crutcher and heat to 140° F. Sift in the
pumice and mix thoroughly. The lye is then added which causes a curdling
of the grain. The stirring is continued until the grain closes and the
soap is smooth, after which the desired perfume is added and the soap
dropped into a frame and crutched by hand. When the soap is set, it is
slabbed, cut into cakes, dried slightly and pressed.


LIQUID SOAPS.

Liquid soaps are merely solutions of a potash soap, usually cocoanut oil
soap, although corn oil is used to make a cheap soap. One of the
difficulties encountered in liquid soap is to keep it clear. At a low
temperature a sediment is often formed, but this can be overcome by the
use of sugar and filtering the soap through a filter press at a low
temperature. In order to prevent the soap from freezing, it is necessary
to lower the freezing point by the addition of glycerine or alcohol.

To make liquid soap by any of the formulae given below, the oil is first
run into a jacketed kettle with a stirring device, and heated to about
120° F. The potash lye is then added and the oil saponified. When the
saponification takes place, especially when cocoanut oil is used, the
mass swells rapidly and may foam over the sides of the kettle unless
water is used to check this, or a kettle of about four to five times the
capacity of the total charge of soap is used. When the saponification
has occurred, the sugar, borax and glycerine are added, the water run in
and the mixture stirred until the soap is thoroughly dissolved. Heat
aids materially in dissolving the soap. The soap is then allowed to cool
and if color or perfume is to be added this is stirred in, after which
the soap is cooled and filtered or else run directly into barrels.

Tallow is not suitable for making a clear liquid soap since it is too
high in stearine which when formed into the stearate makes an opaque
solution. The formulae herewith given have been found to give good
practical results.

                   I.               lbs.
    Cocoanut oil                    130
    Caustic potash lye, 28° B.      135
    Sugar                            72
    Borax                             2
    Water                           267

                  II.               lbs.
    Corn oil                        130
    Caustic potash lye, 26° B.      135
    Sugar                            72
    Borax                             2
    Water                           267

                  III.              lbs.
    Cocoanut oil                    100
    Caustic potash lye, 28° B.      102
    Glycerine                       100
    Sugar                            70
    Water                           833

Formulae I and II contain about 20 per cent. fatty acids. It is
possible, of course, to either increase or decrease the percentage of
fatty acid by varying the amount of water. The water used in making
liquid soaps, of course, should be soft, for hard water forms insoluble
soaps which precipitate and cause a sediment.


USE OF HARDENED OILS IN TOILET SOAPS.

While the introduction of the hydrogenation of oils is a decided advance
in the production of suitable cheaper oils for soap making,
comparatively little hardened oil is employed for soap making in America
up to the present time. In Europe, however, considerable advance has
been made by the use of such oils for manufacturing soap therefrom and a
number of plants turn out large quantities of hydrogenated oils for soap
making as well as for edible purposes. Recently a company has been
formed in this country for hardening oils and it is very probable that
the future will see this material extensively used in our own country,
as these appear to be the one present hope of the soap manufacturer as a
check on the ever increasing cost of fats and oils now used in making
soap.

It is an unfortunate condition that hydrogenated oils produced abroad
are sold under names which give absolutely no indication as to the oil
which has been hardened. The softer and cheaper oils like fish oil,
linseed oil, cottonseed oil, etc., are generally hardened for soap
manufacture to different degrees of hardness. While it is impossible to
definitely state just what products as Candelite, Talgol, Krutolin or
several other coined names of hardened oils are, various investigators
have experimented with them as to their adaptability for producing
toilet soaps and found that suitable toilet soaps may be made from them.
While many objections were at first met with concerning soaps made from
these products, as to their unsatisfactory saponification, the poor
lathering quality of the soaps and their odor and consequent difficulty
in perfuming, the results of most investigators along these lines
indicate that these in many cases were due to prejudice against or
unfamiliarity with handling oils of this type for soap making.

In manufacturing soap from hardened oils it is usually necessary to
incorporate with the charge lard, tallow, tallow oil or some other soft
oil of this nature. Satisfactory bases for toilet soaps, made as boiled
settled soap by the use of Talgol (undoubtedly hardened fish oil), are
said to be made by the formulae[10] below.

              I.

    Tallow                  45 parts
    Talgol                  40 "
    Cocoanut Oil            15 "

              II.

    Cocoanut Oil (Ceylon)    6 "
    Tallow                  12 "
    Talgol, Extra           12 "

The method of boiling a soap of this type does not differ materially
from that of making settled tallow soap base. The soap itself has a
different odor than a straight tallow base, but is said to make a very
satisfactory soap for milling and to be of good appearance.

Satisfactory transparent soaps are made from the hardened oil Candelite,
which replaces the tallow in transparent soap formulae such as have
already been given in the section under "Transparent Soaps." The method
of manufacturing a soap by the use of this product varies in no way from
the usual method employed for making these soaps.

Since hydrogenated oils are high in stearine, their use in shaving soaps
is a decided advantage. It has previously been pointed out that
potassium stearate forms an ideal lather for shaving, and in the
hydrogenating process the olein is converted to stearine. Thus a
hardened oil is advantageous in a shaving soap. As an example of a cold
made soap for shaving the following may be taken.[11]

    Talgol Extra            50 lbs.
    Cocoanut Oil            10 "
    Lard                    10 "
    Soda Lye, 38° B.        20 "
    Potash Lye, 37° B.      21 "

This soap may be made in a crutcher by the method generally used in
making soap by the cold process.


TEXTILE SOAPS.

Soap is a very important product to every branch of the textile
industry. For woolen fabrics it is used for scouring, fulling and
throwing the wool; in the silk industry it is necessary for degumming
the raw silk, as well as for dyeing; in the cotton mills it is used to
finish cotton cloth and to some extent in bleaching; it is, furthermore,
employed in a number of ways in the manufacture of linen. Large
quantities of soap are thus consumed in an industry of so great an
extent and the requirements necessitate different soaps for the
different operations. We will, therefore, consider these in detail.


SCOURING AND FULLING SOAPS FOR WOOL.

The soaps used to scour wool and for fulling the woven cloth are usually
made as cheaply as possible. They are, however, generally pure soaps, as
filling material such as sodium silicate does not readily rinse out of
the wool and if used at all must be added very sparingly. Both cold made
and boiled settled soaps are made for this purpose. The soap is
generally sold in barrels, hence is run directly to these from the
crutcher or soap kettle. As cold made soaps the following serve for wool
scouring or fulling.

                 I.

    Palm Oil                         200 lbs.
    Bone Grease                      460 "
    Soda Lye, 36° B.                 357 "
    Water                            113 "
    Soda Ash                          50 "
    Citronella                         2 "

                 II.

    Palm Oil (Calabar, unbleached)   155 "
    House Grease                     360 "
    Soda Lye, 36° B.                 324 "
    Water                            268 "
    Sodium Silicate                   83 "

                 III.

    House Grease                     185 "
    Palm Oil (unbleached)            309 "
    Soda Lye, 36° B.                 309 "
    Water                            391 "
    Soda Ash                          70 "
    Sodium Silicate                   60 "
    Corn Starch                       10 "

These soaps are made in a crutcher by the usual process for cold-made
soaps, crutched until smooth, dropped into a barrel and crutched by hand
the next day or just before cooling.

As a settled soap for these operations the following charge is typical:

    Palm Oil                                               34 parts
    Cottonseed foots or its equivalent in fatty acids      33  "
    Rosin                                                  10  "
    House Grease                                           23  "

The method of boiling such a soap is the same as for any settled soap up
to the strengthening change. When this stage is reached, sufficient lye
is added to strengthen the kettle strongly. It is then boiled down with
closed steam on salt brine or "pickle" until a sample of the lye taken
from the bottom stands at 16°-22° B. The soap is then run into barrels
and after standing therein for a day is hand crutched until cool to
prevent streaking of the soap.

Besides a soap of this type a settled tallow chip soap is used.


WOOL THROWER'S SOAP.

Soaps for wool throwing are sometimes made from olive oil foots but
these are often objected to because of the sulphur-like odor conveyed to
the cloth due to the method by which this oil is extracted with carbon
disulphide. A potash soap hardened somewhat with soda is also used. As a
formula for a suitable soap of this type this may be given.

    Olive Oil Foots              12   parts
    Corn Oil                     46     "
    House Grease                 20     "
    Soda Lye, 36° B.              3     "
    Potassium Carbonate (dry)     5-3/4 "
    Potassium Hydrate (solid)    23     "

This soap is made as a "run" soap by the general directions already
given for a soap thus made. The kettle is boiled with open and closed
steam, adding water very slowly and aiming to obtain a 220-225 per cent.
yield or fatty acid content of the finished soap of 46 per cent. When
the soap is finished a sample cooled on a plate of glass should be
neither slippery or short, but should string slightly. The finished soap
is run directly into barrels.

A soap for wool throwing by the semi-boiled process may be made from
olive oil foots in a crutcher thus:

    Olive Oil Foots          600 lbs.
    Potash Lye, 20° B.        660 "

The oil is heated to 180° F., the lye added and the mass stirred until
it bunches, when it is dropped into barrels.


WORSTED FINISHING SOAPS.

For the finishing of worsted cloth soaps high in cocoanut oil or palm
kernel oil are preferred. These soaps are finished very neutral, being
made as settled soaps, but given an extra wash change after
strengthening strongly. They are then finished as usual and run into
barrels. If framed too hot, the high percentage of cocoanut oil causes
mottling, which is prevented by crutching by hand until the temperature
of the soap is 140°-145° F. Some typical charges, all of which are
saponified with soda lye, follow:

                    I.

    Palm Kernel Oil                      60 parts
    Corn Oil                             40 "

                    II.

    Palm Kernel Oil                      30 "
    Red Oil (single pressed)             70 "

                    III.

    Red Oil                              33-1/3 "
    Corn Oil                             33-1/3 "
    Cocoanut Oil or Palm Kernel Oil      33-1/3 "


SOAPS USED IN THE SILK INDUSTRY.

Soap is used to a very large extent in silk mills, both for degumming
the raw silk and in silk dyeing. Raw silk consists of the true silk
fibre known as fibroin and a gummy coating, sericin, which dulls the
lustre of the silk unless removed. For this purpose a slightly alkaline
olive oil foots soap is best adapted, although palm oil and peanut oil
soaps are sometimes used, as well as soaps made from a combination of
house grease to the extent of 30 per cent., together with red oil or
straight olein soaps, both of which are artificially colored green. In
using house grease, if 30 per cent. is exceeded in combination with red
oil, the titer is raised to such an extent that the soap does not
readily rinse from the silk nor dissolve readily. They are also not
advisable because they impart a disagreeable odor to the silk.

To make a soap for this purpose from olive oil foots it is made as a
settled soap, care being taken to thoroughly boil the mass on the
saponification change in the closed state to assure proper
saponification. The kettle is usually grained with lye and given a good
wash change to remove the excess strength. The change previous to the
finish should not be too heavy or too large a nigre results. The lighter
the grain is, the better the finished kettle is. A yield of 150 per
cent. is usually obtained. This soap is generally run to a frame,
slabbed upon cooling and packed directly into wooden cases.

For silk dyeing the above soap is suitable, although any well-made soap
of good odor and not rancid is useable. While soap alone is often used
in the bath for silk dyeing, certain dyestuffs require the addition of
acetic or sulphuric acid, which sets free the fatty acids. If these be
of bad odor it is taken up by the silk and is difficult to remove. The
most generally used soaps are the just mentioned olive foots soap or a
soap made from a good grade red oil.

Both kinds are extensively used.


SOAPS USED FOR COTTON GOODS.

In the manufacture of cotton goods, as compared to the wool and silk
industries, very much less soap is used and it is only applied to the
finished fabric either to clean the cloth preparatory to dyeing or to
aid in dyeing with certain colors. It is also used in calico printing.
For cleansing the cloth ordinary chip soap is suitable although a more
alkaline soap finished as a curd soap is an advantage in that the free
alkali contained therein aids in removing the dirt and has no harmful
effect on the cotton. For dyeing cotton goods or to brighten certain
colors after dyeing an olive oil foots soap is most generally employed.
In calico printing soap is used to wash and clear the cloth after
printing. A soap for this purpose should be easily soluble in water and
contain no free alkali, rosin or filler. The best soaps for use in
calico printing are either an olive oil foots soap or an olein soap.


SULPHONATED OILS.

While sulphonated oils are not used to any great extent in the
manufacture of soap, they are used very largely in the dyeing and
printing of turkey and alizarine reds on cotton as well as other colors.
Just what action these oils have is not known. Turkey red oil or
sulphonated castor oil is the best known sulphonated oil.

The process of making these oils is simple. The equipment necessary is a
wooden tank or barrel of suitable capacity, approximately two and a half
times the amount of oil to be treated. There are furthermore required
other tanks or vessels to hold the solutions used such as caustic soda,
ammonia and acid. The tank to be used for the preparation of sulphonated
oil should be provided with a valve at the bottom of the tank and a
gauge to measure the quantity of liquid therein.

The process is carried out as follows:

Three hundred pounds of castor oil are placed in the tank and 80 pounds
at 66 deg. B. sulphuric acid are weighed out in another vessel. The acid
is run into the tank containing the oil in a very thin stream while the
oil is well stirred. At no time should the temperature exceed 40 deg. C.
This operation should consume at least an hour and stirring should be
continued half an hour longer to insure the thorough mixing of the oil
with the acid. The mass is then allowed to settle for 24 hours, after
which 40 gallons of water are added and the mixture stirred until it has
a uniform creamy color indicating no dark streaks. This mixing process
should be carefully carried out and when completed allowed to settle 36
hours. At this point the mass will have separated into two layers, the
lower layer consisting of a water solution of acid and the upper layer
of oil. The former is run out through the valve located at the bottom of
the tank. Another wash may now be given or dispensed with as desired. In
this wash the addition of salt or sodium sulphate at the rate of 1-1/2
pounds per gallon of water is advisable. A 24 deg. B. caustic soda
solution is prepared and added slowly to the acidified oil with constant
stirring. The mass first turns creamy, then becomes streaked, increasing
in streaks as the caustic solution is poured in, and finally becomes
clear and transparent. Water is now added to bring the volume to 75
gallons. The oil is now milky in appearance, but the addition of a
little more soda solution restores the transparency.

In some cases ammonia is used in addition to caustic soda in
neutralizing the oil. Three-fourths of the amount of caustic soda
required to complete the neutralization is first added and then the
neutralization is completed with a one to one liquid ammonia and water
solution.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Seifensieder Ztg., 40, 47, 1266 (1913).

[10] Seifensieder Ztg. (1913), p. 334 and 338.
         "         "   (1912), p. 1229 and 1257.

[11] Seifensieder Ztg. (1912), p. 954.




CHAPTER V

Glycerine Recovery.


The recovery of glycerine is very closely allied with the soap-making
industry, because glycerine is the very valuable by-product obtained in
the saponification of oils and fats. No soap plant is, therefore, fully
equipped unless it has some method whereby the glycerine is recovered
and the importance of recovering this product cannot be too strongly
emphasized.

It has already been pointed out that neutral fats or the glycerides are
a combination of fatty acid with glycerine. These are split apart in the
process of saponification. While by the term _saponification_ as used in
soap making it is inferred that this is the combination of caustic
alkalis with the fatty acids to form soap, this term is by no means
limited to this method of saponification, as there are various other
methods of saponifying a fat. The chemical definition of saponification
is the conversion of an ester, of which glycerides are merely a certain
type, into an alcohol and an acid or a salt of this acid. Thus, if we
use caustic alkali as our saponifying agent for a fat or oil, we obtain
the sodium or potassium salt of the higher fatty acids or soap and the
alcohol, glycerine. On the other hand, if we use a mineral acid as the
saponifying agent, we obtain the fatty acids themselves in addition to
glycerine. While the former is by far the most generally employed for
making soap, other processes consist in saponifying the fats by some
method other than caustic alkalis and then converting the fatty acids
into soap by either neutralizing them with sodium or potassium carbonate
or hydrate.

It is important to again point out here that fats and oils develop free
fatty acid of themselves and that the development of this acid
represents a loss in glycerine. The selection of an oil or fat for soap
making should therefore to a large extent be judged as to its
adaptability by the free fatty acid content, as the higher this content
is, the greater is the loss in the glycerine eventually obtained.
Glycerine often represents the only profit to a soap manufacturer. It is
indeed necessary to determine the percentage of free fatty acid before
purchasing a lot of stock to be made into soap.

In taking up the question of glycerine recovery we will consider the
various methods thus:

1. Where the glycerine is obtained from spent lye by saponifying the
fats or oils with caustic alkali.

2. Where the glycerine is obtained by saponifying the fats or oils by
some other method than the above, of which there are the following:

    (a) Twitchell process.
    (b) Saponification by lime in autoclave.
    (c) Saponification by acid.
    (d) Saponification by water in autoclave.
    (e) Fermentative (Enzymes).
    (f) Krebitz process.


RECOVERY OF GLYCERINE FROM SPENT LYE.

The spent lye obtained from the glycerine changes in making soap varies
greatly, the quality depending upon the stock saponified and the soap
maker's care in handling the operation. No two lyes run exactly alike as
to proportion of the various ingredients, although they are all similar
in containing the same substances either in solution or suspension.
Spent lye is a water solution of mainly glycerine, free alkali either as
caustic alkali or carbonate and salt, including sodium sulfate, but
furthermore contains some soap and albuminous matter either in solution
or suspension. Upon standing in the storage tank the greater part of
the soap usually separates when the lye cools. In order to assure the
greatest economical yield of glycerine by saponifying a fat with caustic
soda it is necessary to obtain a proportion of three parts of water to
every part of fat made into soap. Test runs have shown that this is the
proper proportion and that it is not economical to greatly exceed this
amount, and if a much less proportion is used the full yield of
glycerine is not obtained.

The spent lyes contain varying amounts of glycerine, the first change
being richest in glycerine content, and this being reduced in the
subsequent changes. If the lyes always run high in glycerine it is an
indication that it is not all being obtained. The usual percentage is
from 0.5% to 5% or even more, although the average is somewhere around
2% to 3%. The lye as it comes from the kettle should not contain any
more than 0.5% to 0.6% of free alkali calculated as sodium carbonate,
Na_{2}CO_{3}. If the proportion is higher than this, it shows that the
saponification has been conducted with too high a proportion of alkali,
a condition which should be corrected in the kettle room. An excess of
free alkali does not interfere to any great extent with the successful
recovery of the glycerine, but is a waste of both alkali and the acid
used in neutralizing this. It is, therefore, more economical to run a
strong lye over fresh stock and neutralize the alkali thus, rather than
treating the lye for glycerine recovery.

Before the spent lye can be run into the evaporator it is necessary to
remove the albuminous impurities and soap and to neutralize the excess
alkali to between exactly neutral and 0.02% alkalinity. The lye should
never be fed into the evaporator in the acid condition.

In order to treat the spent lyes for evaporation, they are first allowed
to cool in the storage tank, after which any soap which may have
separated is skimmed off and returned to the soap kettle. This lye is
then pumped to the treatment tank, an ordinary tank equipped with some
method of agitating the liquor, either by a mechanical stirrer, steam
blower or compressed air, until it is about two feet from the top.

After the lye has been skimmed off it is thoroughly agitated and a
sample taken. The amount of lye in the tank is then calculated. Spent
lye is about 1.09 times heavier than water, or weighs about 9 pounds to
the gallon. While the sample is being tested for alkalinity it is
advisable to add sulfate of alumina, which may be dissolving while the
sample is being titrated. This substance should be added in the
proportion of anywhere from 6 to 14 pounds per thousand pounds of lye,
depending upon the amount of impurities contained therein. For a clean
lye six pounds per thousand is sufficient, but for an impure lye a
greater quantity is necessary. The sulfate of alumina used should be
free from arsenic and sulfides and should contain a minimum amount of
grit (silica), as grit reduces the life of the pump valves. This may be
estimated with sufficient accuracy by rubbing the filtered-off portions,
insoluble in water between the fingers and a plate of glass. The object
of adding the sulfate of alumina is to transform the soap contained in
the lye into the insoluble aluminum soaps, and at the same time to
coagulate the albuminous impurities. It must be remembered that the
sulfate of alumina is added only for the fresh lye put into the tank.
Thus if there were 10,000 pounds of lye in the treating tank when the
fresh lye was run in, and 50,000 pounds when the tank is filled, adding
nine pounds of sulfate of alumina per thousand of lye, only 360 pounds
would be added or enough for 40,000 pounds. Sulfate of alumina
neutralizes one-third of its weight of caustic.

To determine the alkali in the sample, 10 cubic centimeters are pipetted
into a beaker, a little distilled water added, then 3 or 4 drops of
phenolphthalein indicator. From a burette, quarter normal (N/4) sulfuric
acid is added until the pink color is just discharged. When this point
is reached 4 to 5 c. c. more of acid are added and the solution is
boiled to expel the carbon dioxide. Should the solution turn pink, it is
necessary to add more acid. After having boiled for 3 to 4 minutes, N/4
caustic soda is added until the pink color just returns and the amount
of caustic soda used is read on the burette. The difference between the
number of cubic centimeters of N/4 sulfuric acid and N/4 caustic soda
gives the amount of alkali in the sample. By using a 10 c. c. sample and
N/4 sulfuric acid and N/4 caustic soda each c. c. obtained by the
difference of these two solutions is equal to one-tenth of one per cent.
(0.1%) of the total alkali in the lye. As an example, say we first used
7.7 c. c. of N/4 sulfuric acid to just discharge the pink, then added 4
c. c. more, or 11.7 c. c. in total. After boiling it required 5.3 c. c.
to bring back a slight pink, the total alkalinity would be 11.7 c. c. -
5.3 c. c. = 6.4 c. c., or 0.64% total alkali in the lye in terms of
caustic soda. If there were 40,000 pounds of lye to be treated then we
should have to neutralize:

40,000 × .0064 = 256 lbs. alkali. Since sulfate of alumina neutralizes
one-third of its weight in caustic, and there are say 9 lbs. of this
added per thousand pounds of lye we would add

40,000 × 9 = 360 lbs. of sulfate of alumina. This would neutralize 360 ×
1/3 = 120 lbs of alkali. There are then 256 - 120 = 136 lbs. of alkali
still to be neutralized. If 60° B. sulfuric acid is used it requires
about 1.54 lbs. of acid to one pound of caustic. Therefore to neutralize
the caustic soda remaining it requires:

136 × 1.54 = 209.44 lbs. 60° B. sulfuric acid to neutralize the total
alkali in the 40,000 pounds of spent lye.

The acid is added and the lye well stirred, after which another sample
is taken and again titrated as before. From this titration the amount of
acid to be added is again calculated and more acid is added if
necessary. Should too much acid have been added, caustic soda solution
is added until the lye is between exactly neutral and 0.02% alkaline.
The filtered lyes at this stage have a slight yellowish cast.

To be sure that the lyes are treated correctly the precipitation test is
advisable. To carry this out filter about 50 c. c. of the treated lye
and divide into two portions in a test tube. To one portion add ammonia
drop by drop. If a cloudiness develops upon shaking, more alkali is
added to the lye in the tank. To the other portion add a few drops of 1
to 5 sulfuric acid and shake the test tube. If a precipitate develops or
the solution clouds, more acid is needed. When the lyes are treated
right no cloudiness should develop either upon adding ammonia or the
dilute acid.

The properly treated lye is then run through the filter press while
slightly warm and the filtered lye is fed to the evaporator from the
filtered lye tank. The lye coming from the filter press should be clear
and have a slight yellowish cast. As the pressure increases it is
necessary to clean the press or some of the press cake will pass through
the cloths. Where sodium silicate is used as a filler, the silicate
scrap should never be returned to the soap kettle until the glycerine
lyes have been withdrawn. This practice of some soapmakers is to be
strongly censured, as it causes decided difficulty in filtering the lye,
since during the treatment of the lye, free silicic acid in colloidal
form is produced by the decomposition of the sodium silicate by acid.
This often prevents filtering the treated lye even at excess pressure
and at its best retards the filtering.

As to the filter press cake, this may be best thrown away in a small
factory. Where, however, the output of glycerine is very large it pays
to recover both the fatty acids and alumina in the press cakes.

In some cases, especially when the lyes are very dirty and the total
residue in the crude glycerine runs high, for which there is a penalty
usually attached, a double filtration of the lye is advisable. This is
carried out by first making the lye slightly acid in reaction by the
addition of alum and acid, then filtering. This filtered lye is then
neutralized to the proper point with caustic, as already described, and
passed through the filter press again.

While in the method of treating the lyes as given sulfuric acid is used
for neutralizing, some operators prefer to use hydrochloric acid, as
this forms sodium chloride or common salt, whereas sulfuric acid forms
sodium sulfate, having 3/5 the graining power of salt, which eventually
renders the salt useless for graining the soap, as the percentage of
sodium sulfate increases in the salt. When the salt contains 25 per
cent. sodium sulfate it is advisable to throw it away. Sulfuric acid,
however, is considerably cheaper than hydrochloric and this more than
compensates the necessity of having to eventually reject the recovered
salt. It may here also be mentioned that recovered salt contains 5-7 per
cent. glycerine which should be washed out in the evaporator before it
is thrown away. The following tables give the approximate theoretical
amounts of acids of various strengths required to neutralize one pound
of caustic soda:

For 1 pound of caustic soda--

    3.25 lbs. 18° B. hydrochloric (muriatic) acid are required.
    2.92  "   20° B.      "            "       "   "     "
    2.58  "   22° B.      "            "       "   "     "

For 1 pound of caustic soda--

    1.93 lbs. 50° B. sulphuric acid are required.
    1.54  "   60° B.     "      "    "     "
    1.28  "   66° B.     "      "    "     "

It is, of course, feasible to neutralize the spent lye without first
determining the causticity by titrating a sample and this is often the
case. The operator under such conditions first adds the sulfate of
alumina, then the acid, using litmus paper as his indicator.
Comparatively, this method of treatment is much slower and not as
positive, as the amount of acid or alkali to be added is at all times
uncertain, for in the foaming of the lyes their action on litmus is
misleading.

After the lye has been filtered to the filtered lye tank it is fed to
the evaporator, the method of operation of which varies somewhat with
different styles or makes. When it first enters the evaporator the lye
is about 11°-12° B. After boiling the density will gradually rise to 27°
B. and remain at this gravity for some time and during which time most
of the salt is dropped out in the salt filter. As the lye concentrates
the gravity gradually rises to 28°-30° B., which is half crude glycerine
and contains about 60 per cent. glycerine. Some operators carry the
evaporation to this point and accumulate a quantity of half crude before
going on to crude. After half crude is obtained the temperature on the
evaporator increases, the vacuum increases and the pressure on the
condensation drain goes up (using the same amount of live steam). As the
liquor grows heavier the amount of evaporation is less, and less steam
is required necessitating the regulation of the steam pressure on the
drum. When a temperature of 210° F. on the evaporator, with 26 or more
inches vacuum on the pump is arrived at, the crude stage has been
reached and the liquor now contains about 80 per cent. glycerine in
which shape it is usually sold by soap manufacturers. A greater
concentration requires more intricate apparatus. After settling a day in
the crude tank it is drummed.

Crude glycerine (about 80 per cent. glycerol) free from salt is 33° B.,
or has a specific gravity of 1.3. A sample boiled in an open dish boils
at a temperature of 155° C. or over.


TWITCHELL PROCESS.

The Twitchell process of saponification consists of causing an almost
complete cleavage of fats and oils by the use of the Twitchell reagent
or saponifier, a sulfo-aromatic compound. This is made by the action of
concentrated sulfuric acid upon a solution of oleic acid or stearic acid
in an aromatic hydrocarbon. From 0.5 per cent. to 3 per cent. of the
reagent is added and saponification takes place from 12-48 hours by
heating in a current of live steam. The reaction is usually accelerated
by the presence of a few per cent. of free fatty acids as a starter.
Recently the Twitchell double reagent has been introduced through which
it is claimed that better colored fatty acids are obtained and the
glycerine is free from ash.

The advantages claimed for the Twitchell process as outlined by
Joslin[12] are as follows:

1. All the glycerine is separated from the stock before entering the
kettle, preventing loss of glycerine in the soap and removing glycerine
from spent lye.

2. The liquors contain 15-20 per cent. glycerine whereas spent lyes
contain but 3-5 per cent. necessitating less evaporation and
consequently being more economical in steam, labor and time.

3. No salt is obtained in the liquors which makes the evaporation
cheaper and removes the cause of corrosion of the evaporator; also
saves the glycerine retained by the salt.

4. The glycerine liquors are purer and thus the treatment of the lyes is
cheaper and simpler and the evaporation less difficult.

5. The glycerine can readily be evaporated to 90 per cent. crude rather
than 80 per cent. crude, thus saving drums, labor in handling and
freight. The glycerine furthermore receives a higher rating and price,
being known as saponification crude which develops no glycols in
refining it.

6. The fatty acids obtained by the Twitchell saponifier may be converted
into soap by carbonates, thus saving cost in alkali.

7. There is a decrease in the odor of many strong smelling stocks.

8. The glycerine may be obtained from half boiled and cold made soaps as
well as soft (potash) soaps.

While the advantages thus outlined are of decided value in the
employment of the Twitchell process, the one great disadvantage is that
the fatty acids obtained are rather dark in color and are not
satisfactorily employed for the making of a soap where whiteness of
color is desired.

To carry out the process the previously heated oil or fat to be
saponified is run into a lead lined tank. As greases and tallow often
contain impurities a preliminary treatment with sulfuric acid is
necessary. For a grease 1.25 per cent. of half water and half 66° B.
sulfuric acid is the approximate amount. The undiluted 66° B. acid
should never be added directly, as the grease would be charred by this.
The grease should be agitated by steam after the required percentage of
acid, calculated on the weight of the grease, has been added. The wash
lye coming off should be 7°-10° B. on a good clean grease or 15°-22° B.
on cotton oil or a poor grease. As has been stated the grease is heated
before the acid is added or the condensation of the steam necessitates
the addition of more acid. After having boiled for 1-2 hours the grease
is allowed to settle for 12 hours and run off through a swivel pipe.

After the grease has been washed, as just explained, and settled, it is
pumped into a covered wooden tank containing an open brass coil. Some of
the second lye from a previous run is usually left in this tank and the
grease pumped into this. The amount of this lye should be about
one-third to one-half the weight of the grease so that there is about 60
per cent. by weight of grease in the tank after 24 hours boiling. Where
occasions arise when there is no second lye about 50 per cent. by weight
of distilled water to the amount of grease is run into the tank to
replace the lye. The saponifier is then added through a glass or granite
ware funnel after the contents of the tank have been brought to a boil.
If the boiling is to be continued 48 hours, 1 per cent. of saponifier is
added. For 24 hours boiling add 1.5 per cent. The boiling is continued
for 24-48 hours allowing 18 inches for boiling room or the grease will
boil over.

After boiling has continued the required length of time the mass is
settled and the glycerine water is drawn off to the treatment tank.
Should a permanent emulsion have formed, due to adding too great an
amount of saponifier, a little sulfuric acid (0.1 per cent.-0.3 per
cent.) will readily break this. During the time this is being done the
space between the grease and the cover on the tank is kept filled with
steam as contact with the air darkens the fatty acids.

To the grease remaining in the tank distilled water (condensed water
from steam coils) to one-half its volume is added and the boiling
continued 12-24 hours. The grease is then settled and the clear grease
run off through a swivel pipe. A layer of emulsion usually forms between
the clear grease and lye so that it may easily be determined when the
grease has all been run off. To prevent discoloration of the fatty acids
it is necessary to neutralize the lye with barium carbonate. The amount
of this to be added depends upon the percentage of saponifier used.
About 1/10 the weight of saponifier is the right amount. The barium
carbonate is added through the funnel at the top of the tank mixed with
a little water and the lye tested until it is neutral to methyl orange
indicator. When the fatty acids are thus treated they will not darken
upon exposure to the air when run off.

Fresh grease is now pumped into the lye or water remaining in the tank
and the process repeated.

The glycerine water or first lye is run to the treatment tank, the fat
skimmed off and neutralized with lime until it shows pink with
phenolphthalein, after having been thoroughly boiled with steam. About
0.25 per cent. lime is the proper amount to add. The mixture is then
allowed to settle and the supernatant mixture drawn off and run to the
glycerine evaporator feed tank. The lime which holds considerable
glycerine is filtered and the liquor added to the other. The evaporation
is carried out in two stages. The glycerine water is first evaporated to
about 60 per cent. glycerol, then dropped into a settling tank to settle
out the calcium sulfate. The clear liquor is then evaporated to crude
(about 90 per cent. glycerine) and the sediment filtered and also
evaporated to crude.

As to the amount of saponifier to use on various stocks, this is best
determined by experiment as to how high a percentage gives dark colored
fatty acids. For good stock such as clean tallow, prime cottonseed oil,
corn oil, cocoanut oil and stock of this kind 0.75 per cent. saponifier
is sufficient. For poorer grades of tallow, house grease, poor
cottonseed oil, etc., 1 per cent. saponifier is required and for poorer
grade greases higher percentages. The percentage of fatty acids
developed varies in various stocks, and also varies with the care that
the operation is carried out, but is usually between 85 per cent.-95 per
cent. Due to the water taken up in the saponification process there is a
yield of about 103 pounds of fatty acids and glycerine for 100 pounds of
fat.

The Twitchell reagent has undoubtedly caused a decided advance in the
saponification of fats and oils and has been of great value to the soap
manufacturer, because with a small expenditure it is possible to compete
with the much more expensive equipment necessary for autoclave
saponification. The drawback, however, has been that the reagent
imparted a dark color to the fatty acids obtained, due to decomposition
products forming when the reagent is made, and hence is not suitable for
use in soaps where whiteness of color is desired.

There have recently been two new reagents introduced which act as
catalyzers in splitting fats, just as the Twitchell reagent acts, but
the fatty acids produced by the cleavage are of good color. The
saponification, furthermore, takes place more rapidly. These are the
Pfeilring reagent and Kontact reagent.

The Pfeilring reagent is very similar to the Twitchell reagent, being
made from hydrogenated castor oil and naphthalene by sulfonation with
concentrated sulfuric acid. It is manufactured in Germany and is being
extensively used in that country with good success.

The Kontact or Petroff reagent, discovered by Petroff in Russia, is made
from sulfonated mineral oils. Until very recently it has only been
manufactured in Europe, but now that it has been found possible to
obtain the proper mineral constituent from American petroleum, it is
being manufactured in this country, and it is very probable that it will
replace the Twitchell reagent because of the advantages derived by using
it, as compared to the old Twitchell reagent.

The method and equipment necessary for employing either the Pfeilring or
Kontact reagents is exactly the same as in using the Twitchell process.


AUTOCLAVE SAPONIFICATION.

While the introduction of the Twitchell process to a great extent
replaced the autoclave method of saponification for obtaining fatty
acids for soap making, the autoclave method is also used. This process
consists in heating the previously purified fat or oil in the presence
of lime and water, or water only, for several hours, which causes a
splitting of the glycerides into fatty acids and glycerine. The
advantage of autoclave saponification over the Twitchell process is that
a greater cleavage of the fats and oils results in less time and at a
slightly less expense. The glycerine thus obtained is also purer and of
better color than that obtained by Twitchelling the fats.

An autoclave or digestor consists of a strongly constructed, closed
cylindrical tank, usually made of copper, and is so built as to resist
internal pressure. The digestor is usually 3 to 5 feet in diameter and
from 18 to 25 feet high. It may be set up horizontally or vertically and
is covered with an asbestos jacket to retain the heat. Various inlets
and outlets for the fats, steam, etc., as well as a pressure gauge and
safety valve are also a necessary part of the equipment.


LIME SAPONIFICATION.

The saponification in an autoclave is usually carried out by introducing
the fats into the autoclave with a percentage of lime, magnesia or zinc
oxide, together with water. If the fats contain any great amount of
impurities, it is first necessary to purify them either by a treatment
with weak sulfuric acid, as described under the Twitchell process, or by
boiling them up with brine and settling out the impurities from the hot
fat.

To charge the autoclave a partial vacuum is created therein by
condensation of steam just before running the purified oil in from an
elevated tank. The required quantity of unslaked lime, 2 to 4 per cent.
of the weight of the fat, is run in with the molten fat, together with
30 per cent. to 50 per cent. of water. While 8.7 per cent. lime is
theoretically required, practice has shown that 2 per cent. to 4 per
cent. is sufficient. The digestor, having been charged and adjusted,
steam is turned on and a pressure of 8 to 10 atmospheres maintained
thereon for a period of six to ten hours. Samples of the fat are taken
at various intervals and the percentage of free fatty acids determined.
When the saponification is completed the contents of the autoclave are
removed, usually by blowing out the digestor into a wooden settling
tank, or by first running off the glycerine water and then blowing out
the lime, soap and fatty acids. The mass discharged from the digestor
separates into two layers, the upper consisting of a mixture of lime
soap or "rock" and fatty acids, and the lower layer contains the
glycerine or "sweet" water. The glycerine water is first run off through
a clearing tank or oil separator, if this has not been done directly
from the autoclave, and the mass remaining washed once or twice more
with water to remove any glycerine still retained by the lime soap. The
calculated amount of sulfuric acid to decompose the lime "rock" is then
added, and the mass agitated until the fatty acids contained therein are
entirely set free. Another small wash is then given and the wash water
added to the glycerine water already run off. The glycerine water is
neutralized with lime, filtered and concentrated as in the Twitchell
process.

Due to the difficulties of working the autoclave saponification with
lime, decomposing the large amount of lime soap obtained and dealing
with much gypsum formed thereby which collects as a sediment and
necessitates cleaning the tanks, other substances are used to replace
lime. Magnesia, about 2 per cent. of the weight of the fat, is used and
gives better results than lime. One-half to 1 per cent. of zinc oxide of
the weight of the fat is even better adapted and is now being
extensively employed for this purpose. In using zinc oxide it is
possible to recover the zinc salts and use them over again in the
digestor, which makes the process as cheap to work as with lime, with
far more satisfactory results.


ACID SAPONIFICATION.

While it is possible to saponify fats and oils in an autoclave with the
addition of acid to the fat, unless a specially-constructed digestor is
built, the action of the acid on the metal from which the autoclave is
constructed prohibits its use. The acid saponification is therefore
carried out by another method.

The method of procedure for acid saponification, therefore, is to first
purify the fats with dilute acid as already described. The purified, hot
or warm, dry fat is then run to a specially-built acidifier or a
lead-lined tank and from 4 per cent. to 6 per cent. of concentrated
sulfuric acid added to the fat, depending upon its character, the degree
of saponification required, temperature and time of saponification. A
temperature of 110 degrees C. is maintained and the mass mixed from four
to six hours. The tank is then allowed to settle out the tar formed
during the saponification, and the fatty acids run off to another tank
and boiled up about three times with one-third the amount of water. The
water thus obtained contains the glycerine, and after neutralization is
concentrated.


AQUEOUS SAPONIFICATION.

While lime or a similar substance is ordinarily used to aid in splitting
fats in an autoclave, the old water process is still used. This is a
convenient, though slower and more dangerous method, of producing the
hydrolysis of the glyceride, as well as the simplest in that fatty acids
and glycerine in a water solution are obtained. The method consists in
merely charging the autoclave with fats and adding about 30 per cent. to
40 per cent. of their weight of water, depending on the amount of free
fatty acid and subjecting the charge to a pressure of 150 to 300 pounds,
until the splitting has taken place. This is a much higher pressure than
when lime is used and therefore a very strong autoclave is required.
Since fatty acids and pure glycerine water are obtained no subsequent
treatment of the finished charge is necessary except separating the
glycerine water and giving the fatty acids a wash with water to remove
all the glycerine from them.


SPLITTING FATS WITH FERMENTS.

In discussing the causes of rancidity of oils and fats it was pointed
out that the initial splitting of these is due to enzymes, organized
ferments. In the seeds of the castor oil plant, especially in the
protoplasm of the seed, the enzyme which has the property of causing
hydrolysis of the glycerides is found. The ferment from the seeds of the
castor oil plant is now extracted and used upon a commercial basis for
splitting fats.

The equipment necessary to carry out this method of saponification is a
round, iron, lead-lined tank with a conical bottom, preferably about
twice as long as it is wide. Open and closed steam coils are also
necessary in the tank.

The oils are first heated and run into this tank. The right temperature
to heat these to is about 1 degree to 2 degrees above their
solidification point. For liquid oils 23 degrees C. is the proper heat
as under 20 degrees C. the cleavage takes place slowly. Fats titering 44
degrees C. or above must be brought down in titer by mixing with them
oils of a lower titer as the ferment or enzyme is killed at about 45
degrees C. and thus loses its power of splitting. It is also necessary
to have the fat in the liquid state or the ferment does not act. The
proper temperature must be maintained with dry steam.

It is, of course, necessary to add water, which may be any kind desired,
condensed, water from steam coils, well, city, etc. From 30 per cent. to
40 per cent., on the average 35 per cent. of water is added, as the
amount necessary is regulated so as to not dilute the glycerine water
unnecessarily. To increase the hydrolysis a catalyzer, some neutral
salt, usually manganese sulfate is added in the proportion of 0.15 per
cent. appears to vary directly as the saponification number of the fat
or oil. The approximate percentages of fermentive substance to be added
to various oils and fats follow:

    Cocoanut oil          8   %
    Palm Kernel oil       8   %
    Cottonseed oil        6-7 %
    Linseed oil           4-5 %
    Tallow oil            8-10%

The oil, water, manganese sulfate and ferment having been placed in the
tank in the order named, the mixture is agitated with air for about a
quarter of an hour to form an even emulsion, in which state the mass is
kept by stirring occasionally with air while the saponification is
taking place. A temperature is maintained a degree or two above the
titer point of the fat with closed steam which may be aided by covering
the tank for a period of 24 to 48 hours. The splitting takes place
rapidly at first, then proceeds more slowly. In 24 hours 80 per cent. of
the fats are split and in 48 hours 85 per cent. to 90 per cent.

When the cleavage has reached the desired point the mass is heated to 80
degrees-85 degrees C. with live or indirect steam while stirring with
air. Then 0.1 per cent.-0.15 per cent of concentrated sulfuric acid
diluted with water is added to break the emulsion. When the emulsion is
broken the glycerine water is allowed to settle out and drawn off. The
glycerine water contains 12 per cent. to 25 per cent. glycerine and
contains manganese sulfate, sulfuric acid and albuminous matter. Through
neutralization with lime at boiling temperature and filtration the
impurities can almost all be removed after which the glycerine water may
be fed to the evaporator. Should it be desired to overcome the trouble
due to the gypsum formed in the glycerine, the lime treatment may be
combined with a previous treatment of the glycerine water with barium
hydrate to remove the sulfuric acid, then later oxalic acid to
precipitate the lime.

The fatty acids obtained by splitting with ferments are of very good
color and adaptable for soap making.


KREBITZ PROCESS.

The Krebitz process which has been used to some extent in Europe is
based upon the conversion of the fat or oil into lime soap which is
transformed into the soda soap by the addition of sodium carbonate. To
carry out the process a convenient batch of, say, 10,000 pounds of fat
or oil, is run into a shallow kettle containing 1,200 to 1,400 pounds of
lime previously slaked with 3,700 to 4,500 pounds of water. The mass is
slowly heated with live steam to almost boiling until an emulsion is
obtained. The tank is then covered and allowed to stand about 12 hours.
The lime soap thus formed is dropped from the tank into the hopper of a
mill, finely ground and conveyed to a leeching tank. The glycerine is
washed out and the glycerine water run to a tank for evaporation. The
soap is then further washed and these washings are run to other tanks to
be used over again to wash a fresh batch of soap. About 150,000 pounds
of water will wash the soap made from 10,000 pounds of fat which makes
between 15,000 and 16,000 pounds of soap. The first wash contains
approximately 10 per cent. glycerine and under ordinary circumstances
this only need be evaporated for glycerine recovery.

After extracting the glycerine the soap is slowly introduced into a
boiling solution of sodium carbonate or soda ash and boiled until the
soda has replaced the lime. This is indicated by the disappearance of
the small lumps of lime soap. Caustic soda is then added to saponify the
fat not converted by the lime saponification. The soap is then salted
out and allowed to settle out the calcium carbonate. This drops to the
bottom of the kettle as a heavy sludge entangling about 10 per cent. of
the soap. A portion of this soap may be recovered by agitating the
sludge with heat and water, pumping the soap off the top and filtering
the remaining sludge.

While the soap thus obtained is very good, the percentage of glycerine
recovered is greatly increased and the cost of alkali as carbonate is
less. The disadvantages are many. Large quantities of lime are required;
it is difficult to recover the soap from the lime sludge; the operations
are numerous prior to the soap making proper and rather complicated
apparatus is required.


DISTILLATION OF FATTY ACIDS.

The fatty acids obtained by various methods of saponification may be
further improved by distillation.

In order to carry out this distillation, two methods may be pursued,
first, the continuous method, whereby the fatty acids are continually
distilled for five to six days, and, second, the two phase method,
whereby the distillation continues for 16 to 20 hours, after which the
residue is drawn off, treated with acid, and its distillate added to a
fresh charge of fatty acids. The latter method is by far the best, since
the advantages derived by thus proceeding more than compensate the
necessity of cleaning the still. Better colored fatty acids are
obtained; less unsaponifiable matter is contained therein; there is no
accumulation of impurities; the amount of neutral fat is lessened
because the treatment of the tar with acid causes a cleavage of the
neutral fat and the candle tar or pitch obtained is harder and better
and thus more valuable.

The stills are usually built of copper, which are heated by both direct
fire and superheated steam. Distillation under vacuum is advisable. To
begin the distilling operation, the still is first filled with dry hot
fatty acids to the proper level. Superheated steam is then admitted and
the condenser is first heated to prevent the freezing of the fatty
acids, passing over into same. When the temperature reaches 230 deg. C.
the distillation begins. At the beginning, the fatty acids flow from the
condenser, an intense green color, due to the formation of copper soaps
produced by the action of the fatty acids on the copper still. This
color may easily be removed by treating with dilute acid to decompose
the copper soaps.

In vacuum distillation, the operation is begun without the use of
vacuum. Vacuum is introduced only when the distillation has proceeded
for a time and the introduction of this must be carefully regulated,
else the rapid influence of vacuum will cause the contents of the still
to overflow. When distillation has begun a constant level of fatty acids
is retained therein by opening the feeding valve to same, and the heat
is so regulated as to produce the desired rate of distillation. As soon
as the distillate flows darker and slower, the feeding valve to the
still is shut off and the distillation continued until most of the
contents of the still are distilled off, which is indicated by a rise in
the temperature. Distillation is then discontinued, the still shut down,
and in about an hour the contents are sufficiently cool to be emptied.
The residue is run off into a proper receiving vessel, treated with
dilute acid and used in the distillation of tar.

In the distillation of tar the same method as the above is followed,
only distillation proceeds at a higher temperature. The first portion
and last portion of the distillate from tar are so dark that it is
necessary to add them to a fresh charge of fatty acids. By a well
conducted distillation of tar about 50 per cent. of the fatty acids from
the tar can be used to mix with the distilled fatty acids. The residue
of this operation called stearine pitch or candle tar consists of a
hard, brittle, dark substance. Elastic pitch only results where
distillation has been kept constant for several days without
interrupting the process, and re-distilling the tar. In a good
distillation the distillation loss is 0.5 to 1.5% and loss in pitch
1.5%. Fatty acids which are not acidified deliver about 3% of pitch.
Very impure fats yield even a higher percentage in spite of acidifying.
For a long time it was found impossible to find any use for stearine
pitch, but in recent years a use has been found for same in the
electrical installation of cables.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] Journ. Ind. Eng. Chem. (1909), I, p. 654.




CHAPTER VI

Analytical Methods.


While it is possible to attain a certain amount of efficiency in
determining the worth of the raw material entering into the manufacture
of soap through organoleptic methods, these are by no means accurate. It
is, therefore, necessary to revert to chemical methods to correctly
determine the selection of fats, oil or other substances used in soap
making, as well as standardizing a particular soap manufactured and to
properly regulate the glycerine recovered.

It is not our purpose to cover in detail the numerous analytical
processes which may be employed in the examination of fats and oils,
alkalis, soap and glycerine, as these are fully and accurately covered
in various texts, but rather to give briefly the necessary tests which
ought to be carried out in factories where large amounts of soap are
made. Occasion often arises where it is impossible to employ a chemist,
yet it is possible to have this work done by a competent person or to
have someone instruct himself as just how to carry out the more simple
analyses, which is not a very difficult matter. The various standard
solutions necessary to carrying out the simpler titrations can readily
be purchased from dealers in chemical apparatus and it does not take
extraordinary intelligence for anyone to operate a burette, yet in many
soap plants in this country absolutely no attention is paid to the
examining of raw material, though many thousand pounds are handled
annually, which, if they were more carefully examined would result in
the saving of much more money than it costs to examine them or have
them at least occasionally analyzed.


ANALYSIS OF FATS AND OILS.

In order to arrive at proper results in the analysis of a fat or oil, it
is necessary to have a proper sample. To obtain this a sample of several
of the packages of oil or fat is taken and these mixed or molten
together into a composite sample which is used in making the tests. If
the oil or fat is solid, a tester is used in taking the sample from the
package and if they are liquid, it is a simple matter to draw off a
uniform sample from each package and from these to form a composite
sample.

In purchasing an oil or fat for soap making, the manufacturer is usually
interested in the amount of free fatty acid contained therein, of
moisture, the titer, the percentage of unsaponifiable matter and to
previously determine the color of soap which will be obtained where
color is an object.


DETERMINATION OF FREE FATTY ACIDS.

Since the free fatty acid content of a fat or oil represents a loss of
glycerine, the greater the percentage of free fatty acid, the less
glycerine is contained in the fat or oil, it is advisable to purchase a
fat or oil with the lower free acid, other properties and the price
being the same.

While the mean molecular weight of the mixed free fatty acids varies
with the same and different oils or fats and should be determined for
any particular analysis for accuracy, the free fatty acid is usually
expressed as oleic acid, which has a molecular weight of 282.

To carry out the analysis 5 to 20 grams of the fat are weighed out into
an Erlenmeyer flask and 50 cubic centimeters of carefully neutralized
alcohol are added. In order to neutralize the alcohol add a few drops of
phenolphthalein solution to same and add a weak caustic soda solution
drop by drop until a very faint pink color is obtained upon shaking or
stirring the alcohol thoroughly. The mixture of fat and neutralized
alcohol is then heated to boiling and titrated with tenth normal alkali
solution, using phenolphthalein as an indicator. As only the free fatty
acids are readily soluble in the alcohol and the fat itself only
slightly mixes with it, the flask should be well agitated toward the end
of the titration. When a faint pink color remains after thoroughly
agitating the flask the end point is reached. In order to calculate the
percentage of free fatty acid as oleic acid, multiply the number of
cubic centimeters of tenth normal alkali used as read on the burette by
0.0282 and divide by the number of grams of fat taken for the
determination and multiply by 100.

When dark colored oils or fats are being titrated it is often difficult
to obtain a good end point with phenolphthalein. In such cases about 2
cubic centimeters of a 2 per cent. alcoholic solution of Alkali Blue 6 B
is recommended.

Another method of directly determining the free fatty acid content of
tallow or grease upon which this determination is most often made is to
weigh out into an Erlenmeyer flask exactly 5.645 grams of a sample of
tallow or grease. Add about 75 cubic centimeters of neutralized alcohol.
Heat until it boils, then titrate with tenth normal alkali and divide
the reading by 2, which gives the percentage of free fatty acid as
oleic. If a fifth normal caustic solution is used, the reading on the
burette gives the percentage of free fatty acid directly. This method,
while it eliminates the necessity of calculation, is troublesome in that
it is difficult to obtain the exact weight of fat.


MOISTURE.

To calculate the amount of moisture contained in a fat or oil 5 to 10
grams are weighed into a flat bottom dish, together with a known amount
of clean, dry sand, if it is so desired. The dish is then heated over a
water bath, or at a temperature of 100-110 degs. C., until it no longer
loses weight upon drying and reweighing the dish. One hour should elapse
between the time the dish is put on the water bath and the time it is
taken off to reweigh. The difference between the weight of the dish is
put on the water bath and the time it is taken off when it reaches a
constant weight is moisture. This difference divided by the original
weight of the fat or oil × 100 gives the percentage of moisture.

When highly unsaturated fats or oils are being analyzed for moisture, an
error may be introduced either by the absorption of oxygen, which is
accelerated at higher temperature, or by the formation of volatile fatty
acids. The former causes an increase in weight, the latter causes a
decrease. To obviate this, the above operation of drying should be
carried out in the presence of some inert gas like hydrogen, carbon
dioxide, or nitrogen.


TITER.

The titer of a fat or oil is really an indication of the amount of
stearic acid contained therein. The titer, expressed in degrees
Centigrade, is the solidification point of the fatty acids of an oil or
fat. In order to carry out the operation a Centigrade thermometer
graduated in one or two-tenths of a degree is necessary. A thermometer
graduated between 10 degs. centigrade to 60 degs. centigrade is best
adapted and the graduations should be clear cut and distinct.

To make the determination about 30 grams of fat are roughly weighed in a
metal dish and 30-40 cubic centimeters of a 30 per cent. (36 degs.
Baumé) solution of sodium hydroxide, together with 30-40 cubic
centimeters of alcohol, denatured alcohol will do, are added and the
mass heated until saponified. Heat over a low flame or over an asbestos
plate until the soap thus formed is dry, constantly stirring the
contents of the dish to prevent burning. The dried soap is then
dissolved in about 1000 cubic centimeters of water, being certain that
all the alcohol has been expelled by boiling the soap solution for about
half an hour. When the soap is in solution add sufficient sulphuric acid
to decompose the soap, approximately 100 cubic centimeters of 25 degs.
Baumé sulphuric acid, and boil until the fatty acids form a clear layer
on top of the liquid. A few pieces of pumice stone put into the mixture
will prevent the bumping caused by boiling. Siphon off the water from
the bottom of the dish and wash the fatty acids with boiling water until
free from sulphuric acid. Collect the fatty acids in a small casserole
or beaker and dry them over a steam bath or drying oven at 110 degs.
Centigrade. When the fatty acids are dry, cool them to about 10 degs.
above the titer expected and transfer them to a titer tube or short test
tube which is firmly supported by a cork in the opening of a salt mouth
bottle. Hang the thermometer by a cord from above the supported tube so
it reaches close to the bottom when in the titer tube containing the
fatty acids and so that it may be used as a stirrer. Stir the mass
rather slowly, closely noting the temperature. The temperature will
gradually fall during the stirring operation and finally remain
stationary for half a minute or so then rise from 0.1 to 0.5 degs. The
highest point to which the mercury rises after having been stationary is
taken as the reading of the titer.


DETERMINATION OF UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER.

In order to determine the unsaponifiable matter in fats and oils they
are first saponified, then the unsaponifiable, which consists mainly of
hydrocarbons and the higher alcohols cholesterol or phytosterol, is
extracted with ether or petroleum ether, the ether evaporated and the
residue weighed as unsaponifiable.

To carry out the process first saponify about 5 grams of fat or oil with
an excess of alcoholic potassium hydrate, 20-30 cubic centimeters of a 1
to 10 solution of potassium hydroxide in alcohol until the alcohol is
evaporated over a steam bath. Wash the soap thus formed into a
separatory funnel of 200 cubic centimeters capacity with 80-100 cubic
centimeters water. Then add about 60 cubic centimeters of ether,
petroleum ether or 86 degs. gasoline and thoroughly shake the funnel to
extract the unsaponifiable. Should the two layers not separate readily,
add a few cubic centimeters of alcohol, which will readily cause them to
separate. Draw off the watery solution from beneath and wash the ether
with water containing a few drops of sodium hydrate and run to another
dish. Pour the watery solution into the funnel again and repeat the
extraction once or twice more or until the ether shows no discoloration.
Combine the ether extractions into the funnel and wash with water until
no alkaline reaction is obtained from the wash water. Run the ether
extract to a weighed dish, evaporate and dry rapidly in a drying oven.
As some of the hydrocarbons are readily volatile at 100 degs.
Centigrade, the drying should not be carried on any longer than
necessary. The residue is then weighed and the original weight of fat
taken divided into the weight of the residue × 100 gives the percentage
unsaponifiable.


TEST FOR COLOR OF SOAP.

It is often desirable to determine the color of the finished soap by a
rapid determination before it is made into soap. It often happens,
especially with the tallows, that a dark colored sample produces a light
colored soap, whereas a bleached light colored tallow produces a soap
off shade.

To rapidly determine whether the color easily washes out of the tallow
with lye, 100 cubic centimeters of tallow are saponified in an enameled
or iron dish with 100 cubic centimeters of 21 degs. Baumé soda lye and
100 cubic centimeters of denatured alcohol. Continue heating over a wire
gauze until all the alcohol is expelled and then add 50 cubic
centimeters of the 21 degs. Baumé lye to grain the soap. Allow the lyes
to settle and with an inverted pipette draw off the lyes into a test
tube or bottle. Close the soap with 100 cubic centimeters of hot water
and when closed again grain with 50 cubic centimeters of the lye by just
bringing to a boil over an open flame. Again allow the lyes to settle
and put aside a sample of the lye for comparison. Repeat the process of
closing, graining and settling and take a sample of lye. If the lye is
still discolored repeat the above operations again or until the lye is
colorless. Ordinarily all the color will come out with the third lye.
The soap thus obtained contains considerable water which makes it appear
white. The soap is, therefore, dried to about 15 per cent. moisture and
examined for color. The color thus obtained is a very good criterion as
to what may be expected in the soap kettle.

By making the above analyses of fats or oils the main properties as to
their adaptability for being made into soap are determined. In some
cases, especially where adulteration or mixtures of oils are suspected,
it is necessary to further analyze same. The methods of carrying out
these analyses are fully covered by various texts on fats and oils and
we will not go into details regarding the method of procedure in
carrying these out.


TESTING OF ALKALIS USED IN SOAP MAKING.

The alkalis entering into the manufacture of soap such as caustic soda
or sodium hydroxide, caustic potash or potassium hydrate, carbonate of
soda or sodium carbonate, carbonate of potash or potassium carbonate
usually contain impurities which do not enter into combination with the
fats or fatty acids to form soap. It is out of the question to use
chemically pure alkalis in soap making, hence it is often necessary to
determine the alkalinity of an alkali. It may again be pointed out that
in saponifying a neutral fat or oil only caustic soda or potash are
efficient and the carbonate contained in these only combines to a more
or less extent with any free fatty acids contained in the oils or fats.
Caustic soda or potash or lyes made from these alkalis upon exposure to
the air are gradually converted into sodium or potassium carbonate by
the action of the carbon dioxide contained in the air. While the amount
of carbonate thus formed is not very great and is greatest upon the
surface, all lyes as well as caustic alkalis contain some carbonate.
This carbonate introduces an error in the analysis of caustic alkalis
when accuracy is required and thus in the analysis of caustic soda or
potash it is necessary to remove the carbonate when the true alkalinity
as sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide is desired. This may be done
by titration in alcohol which has been neutralized.

In order to determine the alkalinity of any of the above mentioned
alkalis, it is first necessary to obtain a representative sample of the
substance to be analyzed. To do this take small samples from various
portions of the package and combine them into a composite sample.
Caustic potash and soda are hygroscopic and samples should be weighed at
once or kept in a well stoppered bottle. Sodium or potassium carbonate
can be weighed more easily as they do not rapidly absorb moisture from
the air.

To weigh the caustic soda or potash place about five grams on a watch
glass on a balance and weigh as rapidly as possible. Wash into a 500
cubic centimeter volumetric flask and bring to the mark with distilled
water. Pipette off 50 cubic centimeters into a 200 cubic centimeter
beaker, dilute slightly with distilled water, add a few drops of methyl
orange indicator and titrate with normal acid. For the carbonates about
1 gram may be weighed, washed into a 400 cubic centimeter beaker,
diluted with distilled water, methyl orange indicator added and titrated
with normal acid. It is advisable to use methyl orange indicator in
these titrations as phenolphthalein is affected by the carbon dioxide
generated when an acid reacts with a carbonate and does not give the
proper end point, unless the solution is boiled to expel the carbon
dioxide. Litmus may also be used as the indicator, but here again it is
necessary to boil as carbon dioxide also affects this substance. As an
aid to the action of these common indicators the following table may be
helpful:

                    _Color in     _Color in
  _Indicator._         Acid        Alkaline       _Action of
                    Solution._     Solution._        CO_{2}._

Methyl orange       Red             Yellow       Very slightly acid
Phenolphthalein     Colorless       Red          Acid
Litmus              Red             Blue         Acid

It may be further stated that methyl orange at the neutral point is
orange in color.

To calculate the percentage of effective alkali from the above
titrations, it must be first pointed out that in the case of caustic
potash or soda aliquot portions are taken. This is done to reduce the
error necessarily involved by weighing, as the absorption of water is
decided. Thus we had, say, exactly 5 grams which weighed 5.05 grams by
the time it was balanced. This was dissolved in 500 cubic centimeters of
water and 50 cubic centimeters or one tenth of the amount of the
solution was taken, or in each 50 cubic centimeters there were 0.505
grams of the sample. We thus reduced the error of weighing by one tenth
provided other conditions introduce no error. In the case of the
carbonates the weight is taken directly.

One cubic centimeter of a normal acid solution is the equivalent of:

                                           Grams.
    Sodium Carbonate, Na_{2}CO_{3}        0.05305
    Sodium Hydroxide, NaOH                0.04006
    Sodium Oxide, Na_{2}O                 0.02905
    Carbonate K_{2}CO_{3}                 0.06908
    Potassium Hydroxide, KOH              0.05616
    Potassium Oxide, K_{2}O               0.04715

Hence to arrive at the alkalinity we multiply the number of cubic
centimeters, read on the burette, by the factor opposite the terms in
which we desire to express the alkalinity, divide the weight in grams
thus obtained by the original weight taken, and multiply the result by
100, which gives the percentage of alkali in the proper terms. For
example, say, we took the 0.505 grams of caustic potash as explained
above and required 8.7 cubic centimeter normal acid to neutralize the
solution, then

    8.7 × .05616 = .4886 grams KOH in sample

    .4886
    ----- × 100 = 96.73% KOH in sample.
    .505

Caustic potash often contains some caustic soda, and while it is
possible to express the results in terms of KOH, regardless of any
trouble that may be caused by this mixture in soap making, an error is
introduced in the results, not all the alkali being caustic potash. In
such cases it is advisable to consult a book on analysis as the analysis
is far more complicated than those given we will not consider it. The
presence of carbonates, as already stated, also causes an error. To
overcome this the alkali is titrated in absolute alcohol, filtering off
the insoluble carbonate. The soluble portion is caustic hydrate and may
be titrated as such. The carbonate remaining on the filter paper is
dissolved in water and titrated as carbonate.


SOAP ANALYSIS.

To obtain a sample of a cake of soap for analysis is a rather difficult
matter as the moisture content of the outer and inner layer varies
considerably. To overcome this difficulty a borer or sampler may be run
right through the cake of soap, or slices may be cut from various parts
of the cake, or the cake may be cut and run through a meat chopper
several times and mixed. A sufficient amount of a homogeneous sample
obtained by any of these methods is preserved for the entire analysis by
keeping the soap in a securely stoppered bottle.

The more important determinations of soap are moisture, free alkali, or
fatty acid, combined alkali and total fatty matter. Besides these it is
often necessary to determine insoluble matter, glycerine, unsaponifiable
matter, rosin and sugar.


MOISTURE.

The analysis of soap for moisture, at its best, is most unsatisfactory,
for by heating it is impossible to drive off all the water, and on the
other hand volatile oils driven off by heat are a part of the loss
represented as moisture.

The usual method of determining moisture is to weigh 2 to 3 grams of
finely shaved soap on a watch glass and heat in an oven at 105 degrees
C. for 2 to 3 hours. The loss in weight is represented as water,
although it is really impossible to drive off all the water in this way.

To overcome the difficulties just mentioned either the Smith or Fahrion
method may be used. Allen recommends Smith's method which is said to be
truthful to within 0.25 per cent. Fahrion's method, according to the
author, gives reliable results to within 0.5 per cent. Both are more
rapid than the above manipulation. To carry out the method of Smith, 5
to 10 grams of finely ground soap are heated over a sand bath with a
small Bunsen flame beneath it, in a large porcelain crucible. The
heating takes 20 to 30 minutes, or until no further evidence is present
of water being driven off. This may be tested by the fogging of a cold
piece of glass held over the crucible immediately upon removing the
burner. When no fog appears the soap is considered dry. Any lumps of
soap may be broken up by a small glass rod, weighed with the crucible,
and with a roughened end to more easily separate the lumps. Should the
soap burn, this can readily be detected by the odor, which, of course,
renders the analysis useless. The loss in weight is moisture.

By Fahrion's method[13], 2 to 4 grams of soap are weighed in a platinum
crucible and about three times its weight of oleic acid, which has been
heated at 120 degrees C. until all the water is driven off and preserved
from moisture, is added and reweighed. The dish is then cautiously
heated with a small flame until all the water is driven off and all the
soap is dissolved. Care must be exercised not to heat too highly or the
oleic acid will decompose. The moment the water is all driven off a
clear solution is formed, provided no fillers are present in the soap.
The dish is then cooled in a dessicator and reweighed. The loss in
weight of acid plus soap is moisture and is calculated on the weight of
soap taken. This determination takes about fifteen minutes.


FREE ALKALI OR ACID.

(_a_) _Alcoholic Method._

Test a freshly cut surface of the soap with a few drops of an alcoholic
phenolphthalein solution. If it does not turn red it may be assumed free
fat is present; should a red color appear, free alkali is present. In
any case dissolve 2 to 5 grams of soap in 100 cubic centimeters of
neutralized alcohol and heat to boiling until in solution. Filter off
the undissolved portion containing carbonate, etc., and wash with
alcohol. Add phenolphthalein to the filtrate and titrate with N/10 acid
and calculate the per cent. of free alkali as sodium or potassium
hydroxide. Should the filtrate be acid instead of alkaline, titrate with
N/10 alkali and calculate the percentage of free fatty acid as oleic
acid.

The insoluble portion remaining on the filter paper is washed with water
until all the carbonate is dissolved. The washings are then titrated
with N/10 sulfuric acid and expressed as sodium or potassium carbonate.
Should borates or silicates be present it is possible to express in
terms of these. If borax is present the carbon dioxide is boiled off
after neutralizing exactly to methyl orange; cool, add mannite and
phenolphthalein and titrate the boric acid with standard alkali.

(_b_) _Bosshard and Huggenberg Method._[14]

In using the alcoholic method for the determination of the free alkali
or fat in soap there is a possibility of both free fat and free alkali
being present. Upon boiling in an alcoholic solution the fat will be
saponified, thus introducing an error in the analysis. The method of
Bosshard and Huggenberg overcomes this objection. Their method is
briefly as follows:

_Reagents._

1. N/10 hydrochloric acid to standardize N/10 alcoholic sodium
hydroxide.

2. Approximately N/10 alcoholic sodium hydroxide to fix and control the
N/40 stearic acid.

3. N/40 stearic acid. Preparation: About 7.1 grams of stearic acid are
dissolved in one liter of absolute alcohol, the solution filtered, the
strength determined by titration against N/10 NaOH and then protected in
a well stoppered bottle, or better still connected directly to the
burette.

4. A 10 per cent. solution of barium chloride. Preparation: 100 grams of
barium chloride are dissolved in one liter of distilled water and
filtered. The neutrality of the solution should be proven as it must be
neutral.

5. [Greek: alpha] naptholphthalein indicator according to Sorenson.
Preparation: 0.1 gram of [Greek: alpha] naphtholphthalein is dissolved in
150 cubic centimeters of alcohol and 100 cubic centimeters of water.
For every 10 cubic centimeters of liquid use at least 12 drops of
indicator.

6. Phenolphthalein solution 1 gram to 100 cubic centimeter 96 per cent.
alcohol.

7. Solvent, 50 per cent. alcohol neutralized.


MANIPULATION.

First--Determine the strength of the N/10 alcoholic sodium hydroxide in
terms of N/10 hydrochloric acid and calculate the factor, e. g.:

    10 c.c. N/10 alcoholic NaOH = 9.95 N/10 HCl}
    10 c.c. N/10 alcoholic NaOH = 9.96 N/10 HCl} 9.96

The alcoholic N/10 NaOH has a factor of 0.996.

Second--Control the N/40 stearic acid with the above alkali to obtain
its factor, e. g.:

    40 c.c. N/40 alcoholic stearic acid =
                              10.18 c.c. N/10 NaOH }
    40 c.c. N/40 alcoholic stearic acid =          } 10.2
                              10.22 c.c. N/10 NaOH }

    10.2 × F N/10 NaOH (0.996) = Factor N/40 stearic acid

        Therefore Factor N/40 stearic acid = 1.016.

Third--About 5 grams of soap are weighed and dissolved in 100 cubic
centimeters of 50 per cent. neutralized alcohol in a 250 cubic
centimeter Erlenmeyer flask over a water bath and connected with a
reflux condensor. When completely dissolved, which takes but a few
moments, it is cooled by allowing a stream of running water to run over
the outside of the flask.

Fourth--The soap is precipitated with 15 to 20 cubic centimeters of the
10 per cent. barium chloride solution.

Fifth--After the addition of 2 to 5 cubic centimeters of [Greek: alpha]
naphtholphthalein solution the solution is titrated with N/40 alcoholic
stearic acid. [Greek: alpha] naphtholphthalein is red with an excess of
stearic acid. To mark the color changes it is advisable to first run a
few blanks until the eye has become accustomed to the change in the
indicator in the same way. The change from green to red can then be
carefully observed.

Let us presume 5 grams of soap were taken for the analysis and 20 cubic
centimeters of N/40 stearic acid were required for the titration then to
calculate the amount of NaOH since the stearic factor is 1.016.

20 × 1.016 = 20.32 N/40 stearic acid really required.

1 cubic centimeter N/40 stearic acid = 0.02 per cent. NaOH for 5 grams
soap.

[Greek: Delta] 20.32 cubic centimeters N/40 stearic acid = 0.02 × 20.32
per cent. NaOH for 5 grams soap.

Hence the soap contains 0.4064 per cent. NaOH.

It is necessary, however, to make a correction by this method. When the
free alkali amounts to over 0.1 per cent. the correction is + 0.01, and
when the free alkali exceeds 0.4 per cent. the correction is + 0.04,
hence in the above case we multiply 0.004064 by 0.04, add this amount to
0.004064 and multiply by 100 to obtain the true percentage. Should the
alkalinity have been near 0.1 per cent. we would have multiplied by 0.01
and added this.

If carbonate is also present in the soap, another 5 grams of soap is
dissolved in 100 cubic centimeters of 50 per cent. alcohol and the
solution titrated directly after cooling with N/40 stearic acid, using
[Greek: alpha] naphtholphthalein or phenolphthalein as an indicator,
without the addition of barium chloride. From the difference of the two
titrations the alkali present as carbonate is determined.

If the decomposed soap solution is colorless with phenolphthalein, free
fatty acids are present, which may be quickly determined with alcoholic
N/10 sodium hydroxide.


INSOLUBLE MATTER.

The insoluble matter in soap may consist of organic or inorganic
substances. Among the organic substances which are usually present in
soap are oat meal, bran, sawdust, etc., while among the common inorganic
or mineral compounds are pumice, silex, clay, talc, zinc oxide,
infusorial earth, sand or other material used as fillers.

To determine insoluble matter, 5 grams of soap are dissolved in 75 cubic
centimeters of hot water. The solution is filtered through a weighed
gooch crucible or filter paper. The residue remaining on the filter is
washed with hot water until all the soap is removed, is then dried to
constant weight at 105 degrees C. and weighed. From the difference in
weight of the gooch or filter paper and the dried residue remaining
thereon after filtering and drying, the total percentage of insoluble
matter may easily be calculated. By igniting the residue and reweighing
the amount of insoluble mineral matter can be readily determined.


STARCH AND GELATINE.

Should starch or gelatine be present in soap it is necessary to extract
5 grams of the soap with 100 cubic centimeters of 95 per cent.
neutralized alcohol in a Soxhlet extractor until the residue on the
extraction thimble is in a powder form. If necessary the apparatus
should be disconnected and any lumps crushed, as these may contain soap.
The residue remaining on the thimble consists of all substances present
in soap, insoluble in alcohol. This is dried and weighed so that any
percentage of impurities not actually determined can be found by
difference. Starch and gelatine are separated from carbonate, sulfate
and borate by dissolving the latter out through a filter with cold
water. The starch and gelatine thus remaining can be determined by
known methods, starch by the method of direct hydrolysis[15] and
gelatine by Kjeldahling and calculating the corresponding amount of
gelatine from the percentage of nitrogen (17.9%) therein.[16]


TOTAL FATTY AND RESIN ACIDS.

To the filtrate from the insoluble matter add 40 cubic centimeters of
half normal sulfuric acid, all the acid being added at once. Boil, stir
thoroughly for some minutes and keep warm on a water bath until the
fatty acids have collected as a clear layer on the surface. Cool by
placing the beaker in ice and syphon off the acid water through a
filter. Should the fatty acids not readily congeal a weighed amount of
dried bleached bees-wax or stearic acid may be added to the hot mixture.
This fuses with the hot mass and forms a firm cake of fatty acids upon
cooling. Without removing the fatty acids from the beaker, add about 300
cubic centimeters of hot water, cool, syphon off the water through the
same filter used before and wash again. Repeat washing, cooling and
syphoning processes until the wash water is no longer acid. When this
stage is reached, dissolve any fatty acid which may have remained on the
filter with hot 95 per cent. alcohol into the beaker containing the
fatty acids. Evaporate the alcohol and dry the beaker to constant weight
over a water bath. The fatty acids thus obtained represent the combined
fatty acids, uncombined fat and hydrocarbons.


DETERMINATION OF ROSIN.

If resin acids are present, this may be determined by the
Liebermann-Storch reaction. To carry out this test shake 2 cubic
centimeters of the fatty acids with 5 cubic centimeters of acetic
anhydride; warm slightly; cool; draw off the anhydride and add 1:1
sulfuric acid. A violet color, which is not permanent, indicates the
presence of rosin in the soap. The cholesterol in linseed or fish oil,
which of course may be present in the soap, also give this reaction.

Should resin acids be present, these may be separated by the Twitchell
method, which depends upon the difference in the behavior of the fatty
and resin acids when converted into their ethyl esters through the
action of hydrochloric acid. This may be carried out as follows:

Three grams of the dried mixed acids are dissolved in 25 cubic
centimeters of absolute alcohol in a 100 cubic centimeter stoppered
flask; the flask placed in cold water and shaken. To this cooled
solution 25 cubic centimeters of absolute alcohol saturated with dry
hydrochloric acid is added. The flask is shaken occasionally and the
action allowed to continue for twenty minutes, then 10 grams of dry
granular zinc chloride are added, the flask shaken and again allowed to
stand for twenty minutes. The contents of the flask are then poured into
200 cubic centimeters of water in a 500 cubic centimeter beaker and the
flask rinsed out with alcohol. A small strip of zinc is placed in the
beaker and the alcohol evaporated. The beaker is then cooled and
transferred to a separatory funnel, washing out the beaker with 50 cubic
centimeters of gasoline (boiling below 80 degrees C.) and extracting by
shaking the funnel well. Draw off the acid solution after allowing to
separate and wash the gasoline with water until free from hydrochloric
acid. Draw off the gasoline solution and evaporate the gasoline.
Dissolve the residue in neutral alcohol and titrate with standard alkali
using phenolphthalein as an indicator. One cubic centimeter of normal
alkali equals 0.346 grams of rosin. The rosin may be gravimetrically
determined by washing the gasoline extract with water, it not being
necessary to wash absolutely free from acid, then adding 0.5 gram of
potassium hydroxide and 5 cubic centimeters of alcohol in 50 cubic
centimeters of water. Upon shaking the resin acids are rapidly
saponified and extracted by the dilute alkaline solution as rosin soaps,
while the ethyl esters remain in solution in the gasoline. Draw off the
soap solution, wash the gasoline solution again with dilute alkali and
unite the alkaline solutions. Decompose the alkaline soap solution with
an excess of hydrochloric acid and weigh the resin acids liberated as in
the determination of total fatty acids.

According to Lewkowitsch, the results obtained by the volumetric method
which assumes a combining weight of 346 for resin acids, are very likely
to be high. On the other hand those obtained by the gravimetric method
are too low.

Leiste and Stiepel[17] have devised a simpler method for the
determination of rosin. They make use of the fact that the resin acids
as sodium soaps are soluble in acetone and particularly acetone
containing two per cent. water, while the fatty acid soaps are soluble
in this solvent to the extent of only about 2 per cent. First of all it
is necessary to show that the sample to be analyzed contains a mixture
of resin and fatty acids. This may be done by the Liebermann-Storch
reaction already described. Glycerine interferes with the method. Two
grams of fatty acids or 3 grams of soap are weighed in a nickel crucible
and dissolved in 15-20 cubic centimeters of alcohol. The solution is
then neutralized with alcoholic sodium hydroxide, using phenolphthalein
as an indicator. The mass is concentrated by heat over an asbestos plate
until a slight film forms over it. Then about 10 grams of sharp,
granular, ignited sand are stirred in by means of a spatula, the alcohol
further evaporated, the mixture being constantly stirred and then
thoroughly dried in a drying oven. The solvent for the cooled mass is
acetone containing 2 per cent. water. It is obtained from acetone dried
by ignited sodium sulfate and adding 2 per cent. water by volume. One
hundred cubic centimeters of this solvent are sufficient for extracting
the above. The extraction of the rosin soap is conducted by adding 10
cubic centimeters of acetone eight times, rubbing the mass thoroughly
with a spatula and decanting. The decanted portions are combined in a
beaker and the suspended fatty soaps allowed to separate. The mixture is
then filtered into a previously weighed flask and washed several times
with the acetone remaining. The solution of rosin soap should show no
separation of solid matter after having evaporated to half the volume
and allowing to cool. If a separation should occur another filtration
and the slightest possible washing is necessary. To complete the
analysis, the acetone is completely evaporated and the mass dried to
constant weight in a drying oven. The weight found gives the weight of
the rosin soap. In conducting the determination, it is important to dry
the mixture of soap and sand thoroughly. In dealing with potash soaps it
is necessary to separate the fatty acids from these and use them as
acetone dissolves too great a quantity of a potash soap.


TOTAL ALKALI.

In the filtrate remaining after having washed the fatty acids in the
determination of total fatty and resin acids all the alkali present as
soap, as carbonate and as hydroxide remains in solution as sulfate. Upon
titrating this solution with half normal alkali the difference between
the half normal acid used in decomposing the soap and alkali used in
titrating the excess of acid gives the amount of total alkali in the
soap. By deducting the amount of free alkali present as carbonate or
hydroxide previously found the amount of combined alkali in the soap may
be calculated.

To quickly determine total alkali in soap a weighed portion of the soap
may be ignited to a white ash and the ash titrated for alkalinity using
methyl orange as an indicator.


UNSAPONIFIED MATTER.

Dissolve 5 grams of soap in 50 cubic centimeters of 50 per cent.
alcohol. Should any free fatty acids be present neutralize them with
standard alkali. Wash into a separatory funnel with 50 per cent. alcohol
and extract with 100 cubic centimeters of gasoline, boiling at 50
degrees to 60 degrees C. Wash the gasoline with water, draw off the
watery layer. Run the gasoline into a weighed dish, evaporate the
alcohol, dry and weigh the residue as unsaponified matter. The residue
contains any hydrocarbon oils or fats not converted into soap.


SILICA AND SILICATES.

The insoluble silicates, sand, etc., are present in the ignited residue
in the determination of insoluble matter. Sodium silicate, extensively
used as a filler, however, will only show itself in forming a pasty
liquid. Where it is desired to determine sodium silicate, 10 grams of
soap are ashed by ignition, hydrochloric acid added to the ash in excess
and evaporated to dryness. More hydrochloric acid is then added and the
mass is again evaporated until dry; then cooled; moistened with
hydrochloric acid; dissolved in water; filtered; washed; the filtrate
evaporated to dryness and again taken up with hydrochloric acid and
water; filtered and washed. The precipitates are then combined and
ignited. Silicon dioxide (SiO_{2}) is thus formed, which can be
calculated to sodium silicate (Na_{2}Si_{4}O_{9}). Should other metals
than alkali metals be suspected present the filtrate from the silica
determinations should be examined.


GLYCERINE IN SOAP.

To determine the amount of glycerine contained in soap dissolve 25 grams
in hot water, add a slight excess of sulfuric acid and keep hot until
the fatty acids form as a clear layer on top. Cool the mass and remove
the fatty acids. Filter the acid solution into a 25 cubic centimeter
graduated flask; bring to the mark with water and determine the
glycerine by the bichromate method as described under glycerine
analysis.

When sugar is present the bichromate would be reduced by the sugar,
hence this method is not applicable. In this case remove the fatty acids
as before, neutralize an aliquot portion with milk of lime, evaporate to
10 cubic centimeters, add 2 grams of sand and milk of lime containing
about 2 grams of calcium hydroxide and evaporate almost to dryness.
Treat the moist residue with 5 cubic centimeters of 96 per cent.
alcohol, rub the whole mass into a paste, then constantly stirring, heat
on a water bath and decant into a 250 cubic centimeter graduated flask.
Repeat the washing with 5 cubic centimeters of alcohol five or six
times, each time pouring the washings into the flask; cool the flask to
room temperature and fill to the mark with 96 per cent. alcohol, agitate
the flask until well mixed and filter through a dry filter paper. Take
200 cubic centimeters of the nitrate and evaporate to a syrupy
consistency over a safety water bath. Wash the liquor into a stoppered
flask with 20 cubic centimeters of absolute alcohol, add 30 cubic
centimeters of absolute ether 10 cubic centimeters at a time, shaking
well after each addition and let stand until clear. Pour off the
solution through a filter into a weighed dish and wash out the flask
with a mixture of three parts absolute ether and two parts absolute
alcohol. Evaporate to a syrup, dry for one hour at the temperature of
boiling water, weigh, ignite and weigh again. The loss is glycerine.
This multiplied by 5/4 gives the total loss for the aliquot portion
taken. The glycerine may also be determined by the acetin or bichromate
methods after driving off the alcohol and ether if so desired.


SUGAR IN SOAP.

To determine sugar in soap, usually present in transparent soaps,
decompose a soap solution of 5 grams of soap dissolved in 100 cubic
centimeters of hot water with an excess of hydrochloric acid and
separate the fatty acids as usual. Filter the acid solution into a
graduated flask and make up to the mark. Take an aliquot containing
approximately 1 per cent. of reducing sugar and determine the amount of
sugar by the Soxhlet method.[18]


GLYCERINE ANALYSIS.

The methods of analyzing glycerine varied so greatly due to the fact
that glycerine contained impurities which acted so much like glycerine
as to introduce serious errors in the determinations of crude glycerine.
This led to the appointment of committees in the United States and
Europe to investigate the methods of glycerine analysis. An
international committee met after their investigations and decided the
acetin method should control the buying and selling of glycerine, but
the more convenient bichromate method in a standardized form might be
used in factory control and other technical purposes. The following are
the methods of analysis and sampling as suggested by the international
committee:


SAMPLING.

The most satisfactory method available for sampling crude glycerine
liable to contain suspended matter, or which is liable to deposit salt
on settling, is to have the glycerine sampled by a mutually approved
sampler as soon as possible after it is filled into drums, but in any
case before any separation of salt has taken place. In such cases he
shall sample with a sectional sampler (see appendix) then seal the
drums, brand them with a number for identification, and keep a record of
the brand number. The presence of any visible salt or other suspended
matter is to be noted by the sampler, and a report of the same made in
his certificate, together with the temperature of the glycerine. Each
drum must be sampled. Glycerine which has deposited salt or other solid
matter cannot be accurately sampled from the drums, but an approximate
sample can be obtained by means of the sectional sampler, which will
allow a complete vertical section of the glycerine to be taken including
any deposit.


ANALYSIS.

1. _Determination of Free Caustic Alkali._--Put 20 grams of the sample
into a 100 cc. flask, dilute with approximately 50 cc. of freshly boiled
distilled water, add an excess of neutral barium chloride solution, 1
cc. of phenolphthalein solution, make up to the mark and mix. Allow the
precipitate to settle, draw off 50 cc. of the clear liquid and titrate
with normal acid (_N_/1). Calculate the percentage of Na_{2}O existing
as caustic alkali.

2. _Determination of Ash and Total Alkalinity._--Weigh 2 to 5 grams of
the sample in a platinum dish, burn off the glycerine over a luminous
Argand burner or other source of heat,[19] giving a low temperature, to
avoid volatilization and the formation of sulphides. When the mass is
charred to the point that water will not be colored by soluble organic
matter, lixiviate with hot distilled water, filter, wash and ignite the
residue in the platinum dish. Return the filtrate and washings to the
dish, evaporate the water, and carefully ignite without fusion. Weigh
the ash.

Dissolve the ash in distilled water and titrate total alkalinity, using
as indicator methyl orange cold or litmus boiling.

3. _Determination of Alkali Present as Carbonate._--Take 10 grams of the
sample, dilute with 50 cc. distilled water, add sufficient _N_/1 acid to
neutralize the total alkali found at (2), boil under a reflux condenser
for 15 to 20 minutes, wash down the condenser tube with distilled water,
free from carbon dioxide, and then titrate back with _N_/1 NaOH, using
phenolphthalein as indicator. Calculate the percentage of Na_{2}O.
Deduct the Na_{2}O found in (1). The difference is the percentage of
Na_{2}O existing as carbonate.

4. _Alkali Combined with Organic Acids._--The sum of the percentages of
Na_{2}O found at (1) and (3) deducted from the percentage found at (2)
is a measure of the Na_{2}O or other alkali combined with organic acids.

5. _Determination of Acidity._--Take 10 grams of the sample, dilute with
50 cc. distilled water free from carbon dioxide, and titrate with _N_/1
NaOH and phenolphthalein. Express in terms of Na_{2}O required to
neutralize 100 grams.

6. _Determination of Total Residue at 160° C._--For this determination
the crude glycerine should be slightly alkaline with Na_{2}CO_{3} not
exceeding 0.2 per cent. Na_{2}O, in order to prevent loss of organic
acids. To avoid the formation of polyglycerols this alkalinity must not
be exceeded.

Ten grams of the sample are put into a 100 cc. flask, diluted with water
and the calculated quantity of _N_/1 HCl or Na_{2}CO_{3} added to give
the required degree of alkalinity. The flask is filled to 100 cc., the
contents mixed, and 10 cc. measured into a weighed Petrie or similar
dish 2.5 in. in diameter and 0.5 in. deep, which should have a flat
bottom. In the case of crude glycerine abnormally high in organic
residue a smaller amount should be taken, so that the weight of the
organic residue does not materially exceed 30 to 40 milligrams.

The dish is placed on a water bath (the top of the 160° oven acts
equally well) until most of the water has evaporated. From this point
the evaporation is effected in the oven. Satisfactory results are
obtained in an oven[20] measuring 12 ins. cube, having an iron plate
0.75 in. thick lying on the bottom to distribute the heat. Strips of
asbestos millboard are placed on a shelf half way up the oven. On these
strips the dish containing the glycerine is placed.

If the temperature of the oven has been adjusted to 160° C. with the
door closed, a temperature of 130° to 140° can be readily maintained
with the door partially open, and the glycerine, or most of it, should
be evaporated off at this temperature. When only a slight vapor is seen
to come off, the dish is removed and allowed to cool.

An addition of 0.5 to 1.0 cc. of water is made, and by a rotary motion
the residue brought wholly or nearly into solution. The dish is then
allowed to remain on a water bath or top of the oven until the excess
water has evaporated and the residue is in such a condition that on
returning to the oven at 160° C. it will not spurt. The time taken up to
this point cannot be given definitely, nor is it important. Usually two
or three hours are required. From this point, however, the schedule of
time must be strictly adhered to. The dish is allowed to remain in the
oven, the temperature of which is carefully maintained at 160° C. for
one hour, when it is removed, cooled, the residue treated with water,
and the water evaporated as before. The residue is then subjected to a
second baking of one hour, after which the dish is allowed to cool in a
desiccator over sulphuric acid and weighed. The treatment with water,
etc., is repeated until a constant loss of 1 to 1.5 mg. per hour is
obtained.

In the case of acid glycerine a correction must be made for the alkali
added 1 cc. _N_/1 alkali represents an addition of 0.03 gram. In the
case of alkaline crudes a correction should be made for the acid added.
Deduct the increase in weight due to the conversion of the NaOH and
Na_{2}CO_{3} to NaCl. The corrected weight multiplied by 100 gives the
percentage of _total residue at 160° C._

This residue is taken for the determination of the non-volatile
acetylizable impurities (see acetin method).

7. _Organic residue._--Subtract the ash from the total residue at 160°
C. Report as organic residue at 160° C. (it should be noted that
alkaline salts of fatty acids are converted to carbonates on ignition
and that the CO_{3} thus derived is not included in the organic
residue).


ACETIN PROCESS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF GLYCEROL.

This process is the one agreed upon at a conference of delegates from
the British, French, German and American committees, and has been
confirmed by each of the above committees as giving results nearer to
the truth than the bichromate method on crudes in general. It is the
process to be used (if applicable) whenever only one method is employed.
On pure glycerines the results are identical with those obtained by the
bichromate process. For the application of this method the crude
glycerine should not contain over 60 per cent. water.


REAGENTS REQUIRED.

(_A_) _Best Acetic Anhydride._--This should be carefully selected. A
good sample must not require more than 0.1 cc. normal NaOH for
saponification of the impurities when a blank is run on 7.5 cc. Only a
slight color should develop during digestion of the blank.

The anhydride may be tested for strength by the following method: Into a
weighed stoppered vessel, containing 10 to 20 cc. of water, run about 2
cc. of the anhydride, replace the stopper and weigh. Let stand with
occasional shaking, for several hours, to permit the hydrolysis of all
the anhydride; then dilute to about 200 cc., add phenolphthalein and
titrate with _N_/1 NaOH. This gives the total acidity due to free acetic
acid and acid formed from the anhydride. It is worthy of note that in
the presence of much free anhydride a compound is formed with
phenolphthalein, soluble in alkali and acetic acid, but insoluble in
neutral solutions. If a turbidity is noticed toward the end of the
neutralization it is an indication that the anhydride is incompletely
hydrolyzed and inasmuch as the indicator is withdrawn from the solution,
results may be incorrect.

Into a stoppered weighing bottle containing a known weight of recently
distilled aniline (from 10 to 20 cc.) measure about 2 cc. of the sample,
stopper, mix, cool and weigh. Wash the contents into about 200 cc. of
cold water, and titrate the acidity as before. This yields the acidity
due to the original, preformed, acetic acid plus one-half the acid due
to anhydride (the other half having formed acetanilide); subtract the
second result from the first (both calculated to 100 grams) and double
the result, obtaining the cc. _N_/1 NaOH per 100 grams of the sample. 1
cc. _N_/NaOH equals 0.0510 anhydride.

(_B_) _Pure Fused Sodium Acetate._--The purchased salt is again
completely fused in a platinum, silica or nickel dish, avoiding
charring, powdered quickly and kept in a stoppered bottle or desiccator.
It is most important that the sodium acetate be anhydrous.

(_C_) _A Solution of Caustic Soda for Neutralizing, of about N_/1
_Strength, Free from Carbonate._--This can be readily made by dissolving
pure sodium hydroxide in its own weight of water (preferably water free
from carbon dioxide) and allowing to settle until clear, or filtering
through an asbestos or paper filter. The clear solution is diluted with
water free from carbon dioxide to the strength required.

(_D_) _N_/1 _Caustic Soda Free from Carbonate._--Prepared as above and
carefully standardized. Some caustic soda solutions show a marked
diminution in strength after being boiled; such solutions should be
rejected.

(_E_) _N_/1 _Acid._--Carefully standardized.

(_F_) _Phenolphthalein Solution._--0.5 per cent. phenolphthalein in
alcohol and neutralized.


THE METHOD.

In a narrow-mouthed flask (preferably round-bottomed), capacity about
120 cc., which has been thoroughly cleaned and dried, weigh accurately
and as rapidly as possible 1.25 to 1.5 grams of the glycerine. A Grethan
or Lunge pipette will be found convenient. Add about 3 grams of the
anhydrous sodium acetate, then 7.5 cc. of the acetic anhydride, and
connect the flask with an upright Liebig condenser. For convenience the
inner tube of this condenser should not be over 50 cm. long and 9 to 10
mm. inside diameter. The flask is connected to the condenser by either a
ground glass joint (preferably) or a rubber stopper. If a rubber stopper
is used it should have had a preliminary treatment with hot acetic
anhydride vapor.

Heat the contents and keep just boiling for one hour, taking precautions
to prevent the salts drying on the sides of the flask.

Allow the flask to cool somewhat, and through the condenser tube add 50
cc. of distilled water free from carbon dioxide at a temperature of
about 80° C., taking care that the flask is not loosened from the
condenser. The object of cooling is to avoid any sudden rush of vapors
from the flask on adding water, and to avoid breaking the flask. Time is
saved by adding the water before the contents of the flask solidify, but
the contents may be allowed to solidify and the test proceeded with the
next day without detriment, bearing in mind that the anhydride in excess
is much more effectively hydrolyzed in hot than in cold water. The
contents of the flask may be warmed to, but must not exceed, 80° C.,
until the solution is complete, except a few dark flocks representing
organic impurities in the crude. By giving the flask a rotary motion,
solution is more quickly effected.

Cool the flask and contents without loosening from the condenser. When
quite cold wash down the inside of the condenser tube, detach the flask,
wash off the stopper or ground glass connection into the flask, and
filter the contents through an acid-washed filter into a Jena glass
flask of about 1 litre capacity. Wash thoroughly with cold distilled
water free from carbon dioxide. Add 2 cc. of phenolphthalein solution
(_F_), then run in caustic soda solution (_C_) or (_D_) until a faint
pinkish yellow color appears throughout the solution. This
neutralization must be done most carefully; the alkali should be run
down the sides of the flask, the contents of which are kept rapidly
swirling with occasional agitation or change of motion until the
solution is nearly neutralized, as indicated by the slower disappearance
of the color developed locally by the alkali running into the mixture.
When this point is reached the sides of the flask are washed down with
carbon dioxide-free water and the alkali subsequently added drop by
drop, mixing after each drop until the desired tint is obtained.

Now run in from a burette 50 cc. or a calculated excess of _N_/1 NaOH
(_D_) and note carefully the exact amount. Boil gently for 15 minutes,
the flask being fitted with a glass tube acting as a partial condenser.
Cool as quickly as possible and titrate the excess of NaOH with _N_/1
acid (_E_) until the pinkish yellow or chosen end-point color just
remains.[21] A further addition of the indicator at this point will
cause an increase of the pink color; this must be neglected, and the
first end-point taken.

From the _N_/1 NaOH consumed calculate the percentage of glycerol
(including acetylizable impurities) after making the correction for the
blank test described below.

1 cc. _N_/1 NaOH = 0.03069 gram glycerol.

The coefficient of expansion for normal solutions is 0.00033 per cc.
for each degree centigrade. A correction should be made on this account
if necessary.

_Blank Test._--As the acetic anhydride and sodium acetate may contain
impurities which affect the result, it is necessary to make a blank
test, using the same quantities of acetic anhydride, sodium acetate and
water as in the analysis. It is not necessary to filter the solution of
the melt in this case, but sufficient time must be allowed for the
hydrolysis of the anhydride before proceeding with the neutralization.
After neutralization it is not necessary to add more than 10 cc. of the
_N_/1 alkali (_D_), as this represents the excess usually present after
the saponification of the average soap lye crude. In determining the
acid equivalent of the _N_/1 NaOH, however, the entire amount taken in
the analysis, 50 cc., should be titrated after dilution with 300 cc.
water free from carbon dioxide and without boiling.

_Determination of the Glycerol Value of the Acetylizable
Impurities._--The total residue at 160° C. is dissolved in 1 or 2 cc. of
water, washed into the acetylizing flask and evaporated to dryness. Then
add anhydrous sodium acetate and acetic anhydride in the usual amounts
and proceed as described in the regular analysis. After correcting for
the blank, calculate the result to glycerol.


WAYS OF CALCULATING ACTUAL GLYCEROL CONTENT.

(1) Determine the apparent percentage of glycerol in the sample by the
acetin process as described. The result will include acetylizable
impurities if any are present.

(2) Determine the total residue at 160° C.

(3) Determine the acetin value of the residue at (2) in terms of
glycerol.

(4) Deduct the result found at (3) from the percentage obtained at (1)
and report this corrected figure as glycerol. If volatile acetylizable
impurities are present these are included in this figure.

Trimethyleneglycol is more volatile than glycerine and can therefore be
concentrated by fractional distillation. An approximation to the
quantity can be obtained from the spread between the acetin and
bichromate results on such distillates. The spread multiplied by 1.736
will give the glycol.


BICHROMATE PROCESS FOR GLYCEROL DETERMINATION. REAGENTS REQUIRED.

(_A_) _Pure potassium bichromate_ powdered and dried in air free from
dust or organic vapors, at 110° to 120° C. This is taken as the
standard.

(_B_) _Dilute Bichromate Solution._--7.4564 grams of the above
bichromate are dissolved in distilled water and the solution made up to
one liter at 15.5° C.

(_C_) _Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate._--It is never safe to assume this salt
to be constant in composition and it must be standardized against the
bichromate as follows: dissolve 3.7282 grams of bichromate (_A_) in 50
cc. of water. Add 50 cc. of 50 per cent. sulphuric acid (by volume), and
to the cold undiluted solution add from a weighing bottle a moderate
excess of the ferrous ammonium sulphate, and titrate back with the
dilute bichromate (_B_). Calculate the value of the ferrous salt in
terms of bichromate.

(_D_) _Silver Carbonate._--This is prepared as required for each test
from 140 cc. of 0.5 per cent. silver sulphate solution by precipitation,
with about 4.9 cc. _N_/1 sodium carbonate solution (a little less than
the calculated quantity of _N_/1 sodium carbonate should be used as an
excess to prevent rapid settling). Settle, decant and wash one by
decantation.

(_E_) _Subacetate of Lead._--Boil a 10 per cent. solution of pure lead
acetate with an excess of litharge for one hour, keeping the volume
constant, and filter while hot. Disregard any precipitate which
subsequently forms. Preserve out of contact with carbon dioxide.

(_F_) _Potassium Ferricyanide._--A very dilute, freshly prepared
solution containing about 0.1 per cent.


THE METHOD.

Weigh 20 grams of the glycerine, dilute to 250 cc. and take 25 cc. Add
the silver carbonate, allow to stand, with occasional agitation, for
about 10 minutes, and add a slight excess (about 5 cc. in most cases) of
the basic lead acetate (_E_), allow to stand a few minutes, dilute with
distilled water to 100 cc., and then add 0.15 cc. to compensate for the
volume of the precipitate, mix thoroughly, filter through an air-dry
filter into a suitable narrow-mouthed vessel, rejecting the first 10
cc., and return the filtrate if not clear and bright. Test a portion of
the filtrate with a little basic lead acetate, which should produce no
further precipitate (in the great majority of cases 5 cc. are ample, but
occasionally a crude will be found requiring more, and in this case
another aliquot of 25 cc. of the dilute glycerine should be taken and
purified with 6 cc. of the basic acetate). Care must be taken to avoid a
marked excess of basic acetate.

Measure off 25 cc. of the clear filtrate into a flask or beaker
(previously cleaned with potassium bichromate and sulphuric acid). Add
12 drops of sulphuric acid (1: 4) to precipitate the small excess of
lead as sulphate. Add 3.7282 grams of the powdered potassium bichromate
(_A_). Rinse down the bichromate with 25 cc. of water and let stand with
occasional shaking until all the bichromate is dissolved (no reduction
will take place in the cold).

Now add 50 cc. of 50 per cent. sulphuric acid (by volume) and immerse
the vessel in boiling water for two hours and keep protected from dust
and organic vapors, such as alcohol, till the titration is completed.
Add from a weighing bottle a slight excess of the ferrous ammonium
sulphate (_C_), making spot tests on a porcelain plate with the
potassium ferricyanide (_F_). Titrate back with the dilute bichromate.
From the amount of bichromate reduced calculate the percentage of
glycerol.

1 gram glycerol = 7.4564 grams bichromate.

1 gram bichromate = 0.13411 gram glycerol.

The percentage of glycerol obtained above includes any oxidizable
impurities present after the purification. A correction for the
non-volatile impurities may be made by running a bichromate test on the
residue at 160° C.


NOTES.

(1) It is important that the concentration of acid in the oxidation
mixture and the time of oxidation should be strictly adhered to.

(2) Before the bichromate is added to the glycerine solution it is
essential that the slight excess of lead be precipitated with sulphuric
acid, as stipulated.

(3) For crudes practically free from chlorides the quantity of silver
carbonate may be reduced to one-fifth and the basic lead acetate to 0.5
cc.

(4) It is sometimes advisable to add a little potassium sulphate to
insure a clear filtrate.


SAMPLING CRUDE GLYCERINE.

The usual method of sampling crude glycerine hitherto has been by means
of a glass tube, which is slowly lowered into the drum with the object
of taking as nearly as possible a vertical section of the glycerine
contained in the drum. This method has been found unsatisfactory, owing
to the fact that in cold climates glycerine runs into the tube very
slowly, so that, owing to the time occupied, it is impossible to take a
complete section of the crude. Another objection to the glass tube is
that it fails to take anything approaching a correct proportion of any
settled salt contained in the drum.

The sampler which is illustrated herewith has been devised with the
object of overcoming the objections to the glass tube as far as
possible. It consists of two brass tubes, one fitting closely inside the
other. A number of ports are cut out in each tube in such a way that
when the ports are opened a continuous slot is formed which enables a
complete section to be taken throughout the entire length of the drum.
By this arrangement the glycerine fills into the sampler almost
instantaneously. There are a number of ports cut at the bottom of the
sampler which render it possible to take a proportion of the salt at the
bottom of the drum. The instrument is so constructed that all the ports,
including the bottom ones, can be closed simultaneously by the simple
action of turning the handle at the top; a pointer is arranged which
indicates on a dial when the sampler is open or closed. In samplers of
larger section (1 in.) it is possible to arrange a third motion whereby
the bottom ports only are open for emptying, but in samplers of smaller
dimensions (5/8 in.) this third motion must be dispensed with, otherwise
the dimensions of the ports have to be so small that the sampler would
not be efficient.

In using the sampler it is introduced into the drum with the ports
closed, and when it has touched the bottom, the ports are opened for a
second or two, then closed and withdrawn, and the sample discharged into
the receiving vessel by opening the ports. When the drum contains salt
which has deposited, the ports must be opened before the sampler is
pushed through the salt, thus enabling a portion to be included in the
sample. It is, however, almost impossible to obtain a correct proportion
of salt after it has settled in the drum and it is therefore recommended
that the drum be sampled before any salt has deposited. A sampler 1 in.
in diameter withdraws approximately 10 oz. from a 110-gal. drum. A
sampler 5/8 in. in diameter will withdraw about 5 oz.

FOOTNOTES:

[13] Zeit. Angew. Chem. 19, 385 (1906).

[14] Zeit. Angew. Chem. 27, 11-20 (1914).

[15] Bull. 107, Bur. Chem. U. S. Dept. Agriculture.

[16] Richards and Gies, Am. J. Physiol. (1902) 7, 129.

[17] Seifensieder Ztg. (1913) No. 46.

[18] Bull 107, Bur. Chem. U. S. Dept. Agriculture.

[19] Carbon is readily burned off completely, without loss of chlorides,
in a gas-heated muffle furnace adjusted to a dull red heat.

[20] An electric oven suitable for this work, which is readily adjusted
to 160 degs. C., has been made for Mr. Low and the chairman, by the
Apparatus and Specialty Company, Lansing, Mich. Its size is 9-1/2 × 10 ×
16 inches, and capacity 8 Petrie dishes. It gives a strong draft at
constant temperature.

[21] A precipitate at this point is an indication of the presence of
iron or alumina, and high results will be obtained unless a correction
is made as described below.




CHAPTER VII

Standard Methods for the Sampling and Analysis of Commercial Fats and
Oils[22]


The following report of the _Committee on Analysis of Commercial Fats
and Oils_ of the _Division of Industrial Chemists and Chemical
Engineers_ of the American Chemical Society was adopted April 14, 1919,
by unanimous vote:

W. D. RICHARDSON, _Chairman_,
Swift and Co., Chicago, Ill.

R. W. BAILEY,
Stillwell and Gladding, New York City.

W. J. GASCOYNE,
W. J. Gascoyne and Co., Baltimore, Md.

I. KATZ,[A]
Wilson and Co., Chicago, Ill.

A. LOWENSTEIN,[A]
Morris and Co., Chicago, Ill.

H. J. MORRISON,
Proctor and Gamble Co.,
Ivorydale, Ohio.

J. R. POWELL,
Armour Soap Works, Chicago, Ill.

R. J. QUINN,[A]
Midland Chemical Co., Argo, Ill.

PAUL RUDNICK,
Armour and Co., Chicago, Ill.

L. M. TOLMAN,
Wilson and Co., Chicago, Ill.

E. TWITCHELL,[A]
Emery Candle Co., Cincinnati, Ohio.

J. J. VOLLERTSEN,
Morris and Co., Chicago, Ill.

[Note A: Resigned.]


Scope, Applicability and Limitations of the Methods.


SCOPE.

These methods are intended to aid in determining the commercial
valuation of fats and fatty oils in their purchase and sale, based on
the fundamental assumption commonly recognized in the trade, namely,
that the product is true to name and is not adulterated. For methods for
determining the identity of oils and fats, the absence of adulterants
therein and for specific tests used in particular industries, the
chemist is referred to standard works on the analysis of fats and oils.


APPLICABILITY.

The methods are applicable in commercial transactions involving fats and
fatty oils used in the soap, candle and tanning industries, to edible
fats and oils and to fats and fatty oils intended for lubricating and
burning purposes. The methods are applicable to the raw oils used in the
varnish and paint industry with the exceptions noted under limitations,
but special methods have not been included.


LIMITATIONS.

The methods have not been developed with special reference to waxes
(beeswax, carnauba wax, wool wax, etc.) although some of them may be
found applicable to these substances. The Committee considers the Wijs
method superior to the Hanus method for the determination of iodine
number of linseed oil as well as other oils, although the Hanus method
has been considered standard for this work for some time and has been
adopted by the American Society for Testing Materials and in various
specifications. It has been customary to use the Hübl method for the
determination of iodine value of tung oil (China wood oil) but the
Committee's work indicates that the Wijs method is satisfactory for this
determination.


Sampling.


TANK CARS.

1. SAMPLING WHILE LOADING--Sample shall be taken at discharge of pipe
where it enters tank car dome. The total sample taken shall be not less
than 50 lbs. and shall be a composite of small samples of about 1 pound
each, taken at regular intervals during the entire period of loading.

The sample thus obtained is thoroughly mixed and uniform 3-lb. portions
placed in air-tight 3-lb. metal containers. At least three such samples
shall be put up, one for the buyer, one for the seller, and the third to
be sent to a referee chemist in case of dispute. All samples are to be
promptly and correctly labeled and sealed.

2. SAMPLING FROM CAR ON TRACK[23]--(_a_) _When contents are solid._[24]
In this case the sample is taken by means of a large tryer measuring
about 2 in. across and about 1-1/2 times the depth of the car in length.
Several tryerfuls are taken vertically and obliquely toward the ends of
the car until 50 lbs. are accumulated, when the sample is softened,
mixed and handled as under (1). In case the contents of the tank car
have assumed a very hard condition, as in Winter weather, so that it is
impossible to insert the tryer, and it becomes necessary to soften the
contents of the car by means of the closed steam coil (in nearly all
tank cars the closed steam coil leaks) or by means of open steam in
order to draw a proper sample, suitable arrangements must be made
between buyer and seller for the sampling of the car after it is
sufficiently softened, due consideration being given to the possible
presence of water in the material in the car as received and also to the
possible addition of water during the steaming. The Committee knows of
no direct method for sampling a hard-frozen tank car of tallow in a
satisfactory manner.

(_b_) _When contents are liquid._ The sample taken is to be a 50-lb.
composite made up of numerous small samples taken from the top, bottom
and intermediate points by means of a bottle or metal container with
removable stopper or top. This device attached to a suitable pole is
lowered to the various desired depths, when the stopper or top is
removed and the container allowed to fill. The 50-lb. sample thus
obtained is handled as under (1).

In place of the device described above, any sampler capable of taking a
sample from the top, bottom, and center, or from a section through car,
may be used.

(_c_) _When contents are in semi-solid condition, or when stearine has
separated from liquid portions._ In this case, a combination of (_a_)
and (_b_) may be used or by agreement of the parties the whole may be
melted and procedure (_b_) followed.


BARRELS, TIERCES, CASKS, DRUMS, AND OTHER PACKAGES.

All packages shall be sampled, unless by special agreement the parties
arrange to sample a lesser number; but in any case not less than 10 per
cent of the total number shall be sampled. The total sample taken shall
be at least 20 lbs. in weight for each 100 barrels, or equivalent.

1. BARRELS, TIERCES AND CASKS--(_a_) _When contents are solid._ The
small samples shall be taken by a tryer through the bunghole or through
a special hole bored in the head or side for the purpose, with a 1-in.
or larger auger. Care should be taken to avoid and eliminate all borings
and chips from the sample. The tryer is inserted in such a way as to
reach the head of the barrel, tierce, or cask. The large sample is
softened, mixed and handled according to TANK CARS (1).

(_b_) _When contents are liquid._ In this case use is made of a glass
tube with constricted lower end. This is inserted slowly and allowed to
fill with the liquid, when the upper end is closed and the tube
withdrawn, the contents being allowed to drain into the sample
container. After the entire sample is taken it is thoroughly mixed and
handled according to TANK CARS (1).

(_c_) _When contents are semi-solid._ In this case the tryer or a glass
tube with larger outlet is used, depending on the degree of fluidity.

(_d_) _Very hard materials, such as natural and artificial stearines._
By preference the barrels are stripped and samples obtained by breaking
up contents of at least 10 per cent of the packages. This procedure is
to be followed also in the case of cakes shipped in sacks. When shipped
in the form of small pieces in sacks they can be sampled by grab
sampling and quartering. In all cases the final procedure is as outlined
under TANK CARS (1).

2. DRUMS--Samples are to be taken as under (1), use being made of the
bunghole. The tryer or tube should be sufficiently long to reach to the
ends of the drum.

3. OTHER PACKAGES--Tubs, pails and other small packages not mentioned
above are to be sampled by tryer or tube (depending on fluidity) as
outlined above, the tryer or tube being inserted diagonally whenever
possible.

4. MIXED LOTS AND PACKAGES--When lots of tallow or other fats are
received in packages of various shapes and sizes, and especially wherein
the fat itself is of variable composition, such must be left to the
judgment of the sampler. If variable, the contents of each package
should be mixed as thoroughly as possible and the amount of the
individual samples taken made proportional to the sizes of the packages.


Analysis.


SAMPLE.

The sample must be representative and at least three pounds in weight
and taken in accordance with the STANDARD METHODS FOR THE SAMPLING OF
COMMERCIAL FATS AND OILS. It must be kept in an air-tight container, in
a dark, cool place.

Soften the sample if necessary by means of a gentle heat, taking care
not to melt it. When sufficiently softened, mix the sample thoroughly by
means of a mechanical egg beater or other equally effective mechanical
mixer.


MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER.

APPARATUS: _Vacuum Oven_--The Committee Standard Oven.

DESCRIPTION--The Standard F. A. C. Vacuum Oven has been designed with
the idea of affording a simple and compact vacuum oven which will give
as uniform temperatures as possible on the shelf. As the figure shows,
it consists of an iron casting of rectangular sections with hinged front
door made tight by means of a gasket and which can be lowered on opening
the oven so as to form a shelf on which samples may be rested. The oven
contains but one shelf which is heated from above as well as below by
means of resistance coils. Several thermometer holes are provided in
order to ascertain definitely the temperature at different points on the
shelf. In a vacuum oven where the heating is done almost entirely by
radiation it is difficult to maintain uniform temperatures at all
points, but the F. A. C. oven accomplishes this rather better than most
vacuum ovens. Larger ovens containing more than one shelf have been
tried by the Committee, but have been found to be lacking in temperature
uniformity and means of control. The entire oven is supported by means
of a 4-in. standard pipe which screws into the base of the oven and
which in turn is supported by being screwed into a blind flange of
suitable diameter which rests on the floor or work table.

_Moisture Dish_--A shallow, glass dish, lipped, beaker form,
approximately 6 to 7 cm. diameter and 4 cm. deep, shall be standard.

DETERMINATION--Weigh out 5 grams (= 0.2 g. of the prepared sample) into
a moisture dish. Dry to constant weight in _vacuo_ at a uniform
temperature, not less than 15° C. nor more than 20° C. above the boiling
point of water at the working pressure, which must not exceed 100 mm. of
mercury.[25] Constant weight is attained when successive dryings for
1-hr. periods show an additional loss of not more that 0.05 per cent.
Report loss in weight as MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER.[26]

[Illustration: STANDARD VACUUM OVEN]

The vacuum-oven method cannot be considered accurate in the case of fats
of the coconut oil group containing free acid and the Committee
recommends that it be used only for oils of this group when they contain
less than 1 per cent free acid. In the case of oils of this group
containing more than 1 per cent free acid, recourse should be had
temporarily to the routine control method for moisture and volatile
matter[27] until the Committee develops a more satisfactory method.

The air-oven method cannot be considered even approximately accurate in
the case of the drying and semi-drying oils and those of the coconut oil
group. Therefore, in the case of such oils as cottonseed oil, maize oil
(corn oil), soy bean oil, linseed oil, coconut oil, palm kernel oil,
etc., the vacuum-oven method should always be used, except in the case
of fats of the coconut group containing more than 1 per cent free acid,
as noted above.


INSOLUBLE IMPURITIES.

Dissolve the residue from the moisture and volatile matter determination
by heating it on a steam bath with 50 cc. of kerosene. Filter the
solution through a Gooch crucible properly prepared with asbestos,[28]
wash the insoluble matter five times with 10-cc. portions of hot
kerosene, and finally wash the residual kerosene out thoroughly with
petroleum ether. Dry the crucible and contents to constant weight, as in
the determination of moisture and volatile matter and report results as
INSOLUBLE IMPURITIES.


SOLUBLE MINERAL MATTER.

Place the combined kerosene filtrate and kerosene washings from the
insoluble impurities determination in a platinum dish. Place in this an
ashless filter paper folded in the form of a cone, apex up. Light the
apex of the cone, whereupon the bulk of the kerosene burns quietly. Ash
the residue in a muffle, to constant weight, taking care that the
decomposition of alkaline earth carbonates is complete, and report the
result as SOLUBLE MINERAL MATTER.[29] When the percentage of soluble
mineral matter amounts to more than 0.1 per cent, multiply the
percentage by 10 and add this amount to the percentage of free fatty
acids as determined.[30]


FREE FATTY ACIDS.

The ALCOHOL[31] used shall be approximately 95 per cent ethyl alcohol,
freshly distilled from sodium hydroxide, which with phenolphthalein
gives a definite and distinct end-point.

DETERMINATION--Weigh 1 to 15 g. of the prepared sample into an
Erlenmeyer flask, using the smaller quantity in the case of
dark-colored, high acid fats. Add 50 to 100 cc. hot, neutral alcohol,
and titrate with _N_/2, _N_/4 or _N_/10 sodium hydroxide depending on
the fatty acid content, using phenolphthalein as indicator. Calculate to
oleic acid, except that in the case of palm oil the results may also be
expressed in terms of palmitic acid, clearly indicating the two methods
of calculation in the report. In the case of coconut and palm kernel
oils, calculate to and report in terms of lauric acid in addition to
oleic acid, clearly indicating the two methods of calculation in the
report. In the case of fats or greases containing more than 0.1 per cent
of soluble mineral matter, add to the percentages of free fatty acids as
determined 10 times the percentage of bases in the soluble mineral
matter as determined.[30] This addition gives the equivalent of fatty
acids combined with the soluble mineral matter.


TITER.

STANDARD THERMOMETER--The thermometer is graduated at zero and in tenth
degrees from 10° C. to 65° C., with one auxiliary reservoir at the upper
end and another between the zero mark and the 10° mark. The cavity in
the capillary tube between the zero mark and the 10° mark is at least 1
cm. below the 10° mark, the 10° mark is about 3 or 4 cm. above the bulb,
the length of the thermometer being about 37 cm. over all. The
thermometer has been annealed for 75 hrs. at 450° C. and the bulb is of
Jena normal 16''' glass, or its equivalent, moderately thin, so that the
thermometer will be quick-acting. The bulb is about 3 cm. long and 6 mm.
in diameter. The stem of the thermometer is 6 mm. in diameter and made
of the best thermometer tubing, with scale etched on the stem, the
graduation is clear-cut and distinct, but quite fine. The thermometer
must be certified by the U. S. Bureau of Standards.

GLYCEROL CAUSTIC SOLUTION--Dissolve 250 g. potassium hydroxide in 1900
cc. dynamite glycerin with the aid of heat.

DETERMINATION--Heat 75 cc. of the glycerol-caustic solution to 150° C.
and add 50 g. of the melted fat. Stir the mixture well and continue
heating until the melt is homogeneous, at no time allowing the
temperature to exceed 150° C. Allow to cool somewhat and carefully add
50 cc. 30 per cent sulfuric acid. Now add hot water and heat until the
fatty acids separate out perfectly clear. Draw off the acid water and
wash the fatty acids with hot water until free from mineral acid, then
filter and heat to 130° C. as rapidly as possible while stirring.
Transfer the fatty acids, when cooled somewhat, to a 1-in. by 4-in.
titer tube, placed in a 16-oz. salt-mouth bottle of clear glass, fitted
with a cork that is perforated so as to hold the tube rigidly when in
position. Suspend the titer thermometer so that it can be used as a
stirrer and stir the fatty acids slowly (about 100 revolutions per
minute) until the mercury remains stationary for 30 seconds. Allow the
thermometer to hang quietly with the bulb in the center of the tube and
report the highest point to which the mercury rises as the titer of the
fatty acids. The titer should be made at about 20° C. for all fats
having a titer above 30° C. and at 10° C. below the titer for all other
fats. Any convenient means may be used for obtaining a temperature of
10° below the titer of the various fats. The committee recommends first
of all a chill room for this purpose; second, an artificially chilled
small chamber with glass window; third, immersion of the salt-mouth
bottle in water or other liquid of the desired temperature.


UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER.

EXTRACTION CYLINDER--The cylinder shall be glass-stoppered, graduated at
40 cc., 80 cc. and 130 cc., and of the following dimensions: diameter
about 1-3/8 in., height about 12 in.

PETROLEUM ETHER--Redistilled petroleum ether, boiling under 75° C.,
shall be used. A blank must be made by evaporating 250 cc. with about
0.25 g. of stearine or other hard fat (previously brought to constant
weight by heating) and drying as in the actual determination. The blank
must not exceed a few milligrams.

DETERMINATION--Weigh 5 g. (±0.20 g.) of the prepared sample into a
200-cc. Erlenmeyer flask, add 30 cc. of redistilled 95 per cent
(approximately) ethyl alcohol and 5 cc. of 50 per cent aqueous potassium
hydroxide, and boil the mixture for one hour under a reflux condenser.
Transfer to the extraction cylinder and wash to the 40-cc. mark with
redistilled 95 per cent ethyl alcohol. Complete the transfer, first with
warm, then with cold water, till the total volume amounts to 80 cc. Cool
the cylinder and contents to room temperature and add 50 cc. of
petroleum ether. Shake _vigorously_ for one minute and allow to settle
until both layers are clear, when the volume of the upper layer should
be about 40 cc. Draw off the petroleum ether layer as closely as
possible by means of a slender glass siphon into a separatory funnel of
500 cc. capacity. Repeat extraction at least four more times, using 50
cc. of petroleum ether each time. More extractions than five are
necessary where the unsaponifiable matter runs high, say over 5 per
cent, and also in some cases where it is lower than 5 per cent, but is
extracted with difficulty. Wash the combined extracts in a separatory
funnel three times with 25-cc. portions of 10 per cent alcohol, shaking
vigorously each time. Transfer the petroleum ether extract to a
wide-mouth tared flask or beaker, and evaporate the petroleum ether on a
steam bath in an air current. Dry as in the method for MOISTURE AND
VOLATILE MATTER. Any blank must be deducted from the weight before
calculating unsaponifiable matter. Test the final residue for solubility
in 50 cc. petroleum ether at room temperature. Filter and wash free from
the insoluble residue, if any, evaporate and dry in the same manner as
before. The Committee wishes to emphasize the necessity of thorough and
vigorous shaking in order to secure accurate results. The two phases
must be brought into the most intimate contact possible, otherwise low
and disagreeing results may be obtained.


IODINE NUMBER--WIJS METHOD.

PREPARATION OF REAGENTS--_Wijs Iodine Solution_--Dissolve 13.0 g. of
resublimed iodine in one liter of C. P. glacial acetic acid and pass in
washed and dried chlorine gas until the original thiosulfate titration
of the solution is not quite doubled. The solution is then preserved in
amber glass-stoppered bottles, sealed with paraffin until ready for use.

Mark the date on which the solution is prepared on the bottle or
bottles and do not use Wijs solution which is more than 30 days old.

There should be no more than a slight excess of iodine, and no excess of
chlorine. When the solution is made from iodine and chlorine, this point
can be ascertained by not quite doubling the titration.[32]

The glacial acetic acid used for preparation of the Wijs solution should
be of 99.0 to 99.5 per cent strength. In case of glacial acetic acids of
somewhat lower strength, the Committee recommends freezing and
centrifuging or draining as a means of purification.

_N_/10 _Sodium Thiosulfate Solution_--Dissolve 24.8 g. of C. P. sodium
thiosulfate in recently boiled distilled water and dilute with the same
to one liter at the temperature at which the titrations are to be made.

_Starch Paste_--Boil 1 g. of starch in 200 cc. of distilled water for 10
min. and cool to room temperature.

An improved starch solution may be prepared by autoclaving 2 g. of
starch and 6 g. of boric acid dissolved in 200 cc. water at 15 lbs.
pressure for 15 min. This solution has good keeping qualities.

_Potassium Iodide Solution_--Dissolve 150 g. of potassium iodide in
water and make up to one liter.

_N_/10 _Potassium Bichromate_--Dissolve 4.903 g. of C. P. potassium
bichromate in water and make the volume up to one liter at the
temperature at which titrations are to be made.

The Committee calls attention to the fact that occasionally potassium
bichromate is found containing sodium bichromate, although this is of
rare occurrence. If the analyst suspects that he is dealing with an
impure potassium bichromate, the purity can be ascertained by titration
against re-sublimed iodine. However, this is unnecessary in the great
majority of cases.

_Standardization of the Sodium Thiosulfate Solution_--Place 40 cc. of
the potassium bichromate solution, to which has been added 10 cc. of the
solution of potassium iodide, in a glass-stoppered flask. Add to this 5
cc. of strong hydro-chloric acid. Dilute with 100 cc. of water, and
allow the _N_/10 sodium thiosulfate to flow slowly into the flask until
the yellow color of the liquid has almost disappeared. Add a few drops
of the starch paste, and with constant shaking continue to add the
_N_/10 sodium thiosulfate solution until the blue color just disappears.

DETERMINATION--Weigh accurately from 0.10 to 0.50 g. (depending on the
iodine number) of the melted and filtered sample into a clean, dry,
16-oz. glass-stoppered bottle containing 15-20 cc. of carbon
tetrachloride or chloroform. Add 25 cc. of iodine solution from a
pipette, allowing to drain for a definite time. The excess of iodine
should be from 50 per cent to 60 per cent of the amount added, that is,
from 100 per cent to 150 per cent of the amount absorbed. Moisten the
stopper with a 15 per cent potassium iodide solution to prevent loss of
iodine or chlorine but guard against an amount sufficient to run down
inside the bottle. Let the bottle stand in a dark place for 1/2 hr. at
a uniform temperature. At the end of that time add 20 cc. of 15 per cent
potassium iodide solution and 100 cc. of distilled water. Titrate the
iodine with _N_/10 sodium thiosulfate solution which is added gradually,
with constant shaking, until the yellow color of the solution has almost
disappeared. Add a few drops of starch paste and continue titration
until the blue color has entirely disappeared. Toward the end of the
reaction stopper the bottle and shake violently so that any iodine
remaining in solution in the tetrachloride or chloroform may be taken up
by the potassium iodide solution. Conduct two determinations on blanks
which must be run in the same manner as the sample except that no fat is
used in the blanks. Slight variations in temperature quite appreciably
affect the titer of the iodine solution, as acetic acid has a high
coefficient of expansion. It is, therefore, essential that the blanks
and determinations on the sample be made at the same time. The number of
cc. of standard thiosulfate solution required by the blank, less the
amount used in the determination, gives the thiosulfate equivalent of
the iodine absorbed by the amount of sample used in the determination.
Calculate to centigrams of iodine absorbed by 1 g. of sample (= per cent
iodine absorbed).

DETERMINATION, TUNG OIL--Tung oil shows an erratic behavior with most
iodine reagents and this is particularly noticeable in the case of the
Hanus reagent which is entirely unsuitable for determining the iodine
number of this oil since extremely high and irregular results are
obtained. The Hübl solution shows a progressive absorption up to 24 hrs.
and probably for a longer time but the period required is entirely too
long for a chemical determination. The Wijs solution gives good results
if the following precautions are observed:

Weigh out 0.15 ± 0.05 g., use an excess of 55 ± 3 per cent Wijs
solution. Conduct the absorption at a temperature of 20-25° C. for 1 hr.
In other respects follow the instructions detailed above.


SAPONIFICATION NUMBER (KOETTSTORFER NUMBER).

PREPARATION OF REAGENTS. _N/2 Hydrochloric Acid_--Carefully
standardized.

_Alcoholic Potassium Hydroxide Solution_--Dissolve 40 g. of pure
potassium hydroxide in one liter of 95 per cent redistilled alcohol (by
volume). The alcohol should be redistilled from potassium hydroxide over
which it has been standing for some time, or with which it has been
boiled for some time, using a reflux condenser. The solution must be
clear and the potassium hydroxide free from carbonates.

DETERMINATION--Weigh accurate about 5 g. of the filtered sample into a
250 to 300 cc. Erlenmeyer flask. Pipette 50 cc. of the alcoholic
potassium hydroxide solution into the flask, allowing the pipette to
drain for a definite time. Connect the flask with an air condenser and
boil until the fat is completely saponified (about 30 minutes). Cool and
titrate with the _N_/2 hydrochloric acid, using phenolphthalein as an
indicator. Calculate the Koettstorfer number (mg. of potassium hydroxide
required to saponify 1 g. of fat). Conduct 2 or 3 blank determinations,
using the same pipette and draining for the same length of time as
above.


MELTING POINT.

APPARATUS--_Capillary tubes_ made from 5 mm. inside diameter thin-walled
glass tubing drawn out to 1 mm. inside diameter. Length of capillary
part of tubes to be about 5 cm. Length of tube over all 8 cm.

_Standard thermometer_ graduated in tenths of a degree.

_600 cc. beaker._

DETERMINATION--The sample should be clear when melted and entirely free
from moisture, or incorrect results will be obtained.

Melt and thoroughly mix the sample. Dip three of the capillary tubes
above described in the oil so that the fat in the tube stands about 1
cm. in height. Now fuse the capillary end carefully by means of a small
blast flame and allow to cool. These tubes are placed in a refrigerator
over night at a temperature of from 40 to 50° F. They are then fastened
by means of a rubber band or other suitable means to the bulb of a
thermometer graduated in tenths of a degree. The thermometer is
suspended in a beaker of water (which is agitated by air or other
suitable means) so that the bottom of the bulb of the thermometer is
immersed to a depth of about 3 cm. The temperature of the water is
increased gradually at the rate of about 1° per minute.

The point at which the sample becomes opalescent is first noted and the
heating continued until the contents of the tube becomes uniformly
transparent. The latter temperature is reported as the melting point.

Before finally melting to a perfectly clear fluid, the sample becomes
opalescent and usually appears clear at the top, bottom, and sides
before becoming clear at the center. The heating is continued until the
contents of the tube become uniformly clear and transparent. This
temperature is reported as the melting point.[33] It is usually only a
fraction of a degree above the opalescent point noted. The thermometer
should be read to the nearest 1/2° C., and in addition this temperature
may be reported to the nearest degree Fahrenheit if desired.


CLOUD TEST.

PRECAUTIONS--(1) The oil must be perfectly dry, because the presence of
moisture will produce a turbidity before the clouding point is reached.

(2) The oil must be heated to 150° C. over a free flame, immediately
before making the test.

(3) There must not be too much discrepancy between the temperature of
the bath and the clouding point of the oil. An oil that will cloud at
the temperature of hydrant water should be tested in a bath of that
temperature. An oil that will cloud in a mixture of ice and water should
be tested in such a bath. An oil that will not cloud in a bath of ice
and water must be tested in a bath of salt, ice, and water.

DETERMINATION--The oil is heated in a porcelain casserole over a free
flame to 150° C., stirring with the thermometer. As soon as it can be
done with safety, the oil is transferred to a 4 oz. oil bottle, which
must be perfectly dry. One and one-half ounces of the oil are sufficient
for the test. A dry centigrade thermometer is placed in the oil, and the
bottle is then cooled by immersion in a suitable bath. The oil is
constantly stirred with the thermometer, taking care not to remove the
thermometer from the oil at any time during the test, so as to avoid
stirring air bubbles into the oil. The bottle is frequently removed from
the bath for a few moments. The oil must not be allowed to chill on the
sides and bottom of the bottle. This is effected by constant and
vigorous stirring with the thermometer. As soon as the first permanent
cloud shows in the body of the oil, the temperature at which this cloud
occurs is noted.

With care, results concordant to within 1/2° C. can be obtained by this
method. A Fahrenheit thermometer is sometimes used because it has become
customary to report results in degrees Fahrenheit.

The oil must be tested within a short time after heating to 150° C. and
a re-test must always be preceded by reheating to that temperature. The
cloud point should be approached as quickly as possible, yet not so
fast that the oil is frozen on the sides or bottom of the bottle before
the cloud test is reached.


Notes on the Above Methods.


SAMPLING.

The standard size of sample adopted by the committee is at least 3 lbs.
in weight. The committee realizes that this amount is larger than any
samples usually furnished even when representing shipments of from
20,000 to 60,000 lbs. but it believes that the requirement of a larger
sample is desirable and will work toward uniform and more concordant
results in analysis. It will probably continue to be the custom of the
trade to submit smaller buyers' samples than required by the committee,
but these are to be considered only as samples for inspection and not
for analysis. The standard analytical sample must consist of 3 lbs. or
more.

The reasons for keeping samples in a dark, cool place are obvious. This
is to prevent any increase in rancidity and any undue increase in free
fatty acids. In the case of many fats the committee has found in its
co-operative analytical work that free acid tends to increase very
rapidly. This tendency is minimized by low temperatures.


MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER.

After careful consideration the committee has decided that moisture is
best determined in a vacuum oven of the design which accompanies the
above report. Numerous results on check samples have confirmed the
committee's conclusions. The oven recommended by the committee is
constructed on the basis of well-known principles and it is hoped that
this type will be adopted generally by chemists who are called upon to
analyze fats and oils. The experiments of the committee indicate that it
is a most difficult matter to design a vacuum oven which will produce
uniform temperatures throughout; and one of the principal ideas in the
design adopted is uniformity of temperature over the entire single
shelf. This idea has not quite been realized in practice but,
nevertheless, the present design approaches much closer to the ideal
than other vacuum ovens commonly used. In the drawing the essential
dimensions are those between the heating units and the shelf and the
length and breadth of the outer casting. The standard Fat Analysis
Committee Oven (F. A. C. Oven) can be furnished by Messrs. E. H. Sargent
& Company, 125 West Lake street, Chicago.

The committee realizes that for routine work a quicker method is
desirable and has added one such method and has also stated the
conditions under which comparable results can be obtained by means of
the ordinary well-ventilated air oven held at 105 to 110° C. However, in
accordance with a fundamental principle adopted by the committee at its
first meeting, only one standard method is adopted and declared official
for each determination.

The committee realizes that in the case of all methods for determining
moisture by means of loss on heating there may be a loss due to volatile
matter (especially fatty acids) other than water. The title of the
determination MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER indicates this idea, but any
considerable error from this source may occur only in the case of high
acid fats and oils and particularly those containing lower fatty acids
such as coconut and palm kernel oil. In the case of extracted greases
which have not been properly purified, some of the solvent may also be
included in the moisture and volatile matter determination, but inasmuch
as the solvent, usually a petroleum product, can only be considered as
foreign matter, for commercial purposes, it is entirely proper to
include it with the moisture.

The committee has also considered the various distillation methods for
the determination of moisture in fats and oils, but since according to
the fundamental principles which it was endeavoring to follow it could
only standardize one method, it was decided that the most desirable one
on the whole was the vacuum-oven method as given. There are cases
wherein a chemist may find it desirable to check a moisture
determination or investigate the moisture content of a fat or oil
further by means of one of the distillation methods.

However, in co-operative work the distillation method in various types
of apparatus has not yielded satisfactory results. The difficulties
appear to be connected with a proper choice of solvent and particularly
with the tendency of drops of water to adhere to various parts of the
glass apparatus instead of passing on to the measuring device. When
working on coconut oil containing a high percentage of free fatty acids,
concordant results could not be obtained by the various members of the
committee when working with identical samples, solvents and apparatus.

On the other hand, the committee found by individual work, co-operative
work and collaborative work by several members of the committee in one
laboratory, that the old, well-known direct heating method (which the
committee has designated the hot plate method) yielded very satisfactory
results on all sorts of fats and oils including emulsions such as butter
and oleomargarine and even on coconut oil samples containing 15 to 20
per cent free fatty acids and 5 to 6 per cent of moisture.
Unfortunately, this method depends altogether on the operator's skill
and while the method may be taught to any person whether a chemist or
not so that he can obtain excellent results with it, it is difficult to
give a sufficiently, complete description of it so that any chemist
anywhere after reading the description could follow it successfully. The
method is undoubtedly worthy of much confidence in careful hands. It is
quick, accurate and reliable. It is probably the best single method for
the determination of moisture in all sorts of samples for routine
laboratory work. On account of this fact the committee desires to
announce its willingness to instruct any person in the proper use of the
method who desires to become acquainted with it and who will visit any
committee member's laboratory.


INSOLUBLE IMPURITIES.

This determination, the title for which was adopted after careful
consideration, determines the impurities which have generally been known
as dirt, suspended matter, suspended solids, foreign solids, foreign
matter, etc., in the past. The first solvent recommended by the
committee is hot kerosene to be followed by petroleum ether kept at
ordinary room temperature. Petroleum ether, cold or only slightly warm,
is not a good fat and metallic soap solvent, whereas hot kerosene
dissolves these substances readily, and for this reason the committee
has recommended the double solvent method so as to exclude metallic
soaps which are determined below as soluble mineral matter.


SOLUBLE MINERAL MATTER.

Soluble mineral matter represents mineral matter combined with fatty
acids in the form of soaps in solution in the fat or oil. Formerly, this
mineral matter was often determined in combination by weighing the
separated metallic soap or by weighing it in conjunction with the
insoluble impurities. Since the soaps present consist mostly of lime
soap, it has been customary to calculate the lime present therein by
taking 0.1 the weight of the total metallic soaps. The standard method
as given above is direct and involves no calculation. The routine method
given in the note has been placed among the methods for the reason that
it is used in some laboratories, but has not been adopted as a standard
method in view of the fact that the committee has made it a rule to
adopt only one standard method. It should be pointed out, however, that
the method cannot be considered accurate for the reason that insoluble
impurities may vary from sample to sample to a considerable extent and
the error due to the presence of large particles of insoluble impurities
is thus transferred to the soluble mineral matter. The committee has
found one type of grease (naphtha bone grease) which shows most unusual
characteristics. The type sample contains 4.3 per cent soluble mineral
matter by the committee method which would be equivalent to 43.0 per
cent free fatty acid. The kerosene and gasoline filtrate was
particularly clear, nevertheless the ash was found to contain 36.43 per
cent P_{2}O_{5} equivalent to 79.60 per cent of Ca_{3}(PO_{4})_{2} and
9.63 per cent of Fe_{2}O_{3}. The method, therefore, determines the
soluble mineral matter in this case satisfactorily but the factor 10 is
not applicable for calculating the fatty acids combined therewith. It is
necessary, therefore, in order to determine the fatty acids combined
with soluble mineral matter in the original sample to determine the
actual bases in the soluble mineral matter as obtained by ashing the
kerosene and gasoline filtrate. To the bases so determined the factor 10
can then be applied.


FREE FATTY ACID.

The fatty acid method adopted is sufficiently accurate for commercial
purposes. In many routine laboratories the fat or oil is measured and
not weighed, but the committee recommends weighing the sample in all
cases. For scientific purposes the result is often expressed as "acid
number," meaning the number of milligrams of KOH required to neutralize
the free acids in one gram of fat, but the commercial practice has been,
and is, to express the fatty acids as oleic acid or in the case of palm
oil, as palmitic acid, in some instances. The committee sees no
objection to the continuation of this custom so long as the analytical
report clearly indicates how the free acid is expressed. For a more
exact expression of the free acid in a given fat, the committee
recommends that the ratio of acid number to saponification number be
used. This method of expressing results is subject to error when
unsaponifiable fatty matter is present, since the result expresses the
ratio of free fatty acid to total saponifiable fatty matter present.


TITER.

At the present time the prices of glycerol and caustic potash are
abnormally high, but the committee has considered that the methods
adopted are for normal times and normal prices. For routine work during
the period of high prices the following method may be used for preparing
the fatty acids and is recommended by the committee:

Fifty grams of fat are saponified with 60 cc. of a solution of 2 parts
of methyl alcohol to 1 of 50 per cent NaOH. The soap is dried,
pulverized and dissolved in 1000 cc. of water in a porcelain dish and
then decomposed with 25 cc. of 75 per cent sulphuric acid. The fatty
acids are boiled until clear oil is formed and then collected and
settled in a 150-cc. beaker and filtered into a 50-cc. beaker. They are
then heated to 130° C. as rapidly as possible with stirring, and
transferred, after they have cooled somewhat, to the usual 1-in. by
4-in. titer tube.

The method of taking the titer, including handling the thermometer, to
be followed is the same as that described in the standard method. Even
at present high prices many laboratories are using the glycerol-caustic
potash method for preparing the fatty acids, figuring that the saving of
time more than compensates for the extra cost of the reagents. Caustic
soda cannot be substituted for caustic potash in the glycerol method.

UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER.

The committee has considered unsaponifiable matter to include those
substances frequently found dissolved in fats and oils which are not
saponified by the caustic alkalies and which at the same time are
soluble in the ordinary fat solvents. The term includes such substances
as the higher alcohols, such as cholesterol which is found in animal
fats, phytosterol found in some vegetable fats, paraffin and petroleum
oils, etc. UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER should not be confused in the lay mind
with INSOLUBLE IMPURITIES OR SOLUBLE MINERAL MATTER.

The method adopted by the committee has been selected only after the
most careful consideration of other methods, such as the dry extraction
method and the wet method making use of the separatory funnel. At first
consideration the dry extraction process would seem to offer the best
basis for an unsaponifiable matter method, but in practice it has been
found absolutely impossible for different analysts to obtain agreeing
results when using any of the dry extraction methods proposed.
Therefore, this method had to be abandoned after numerous trials,
although several members of the committee strongly favored it in the
beginning.

IODINE NUMBER--The iodine number adopted by the committee is that
determined by the well-known Wijs method. This method was adopted after
careful comparison with the Hanus and Hübl methods. The Hübl method was
eliminated from consideration almost at the beginning of the committee's
work for the reason that the time required for complete absorption of
the iodine is unnecessarily long and, in fact, even after absorption has
gone on over night, it is apparently not complete. In the case of the
Hanus and Wijs methods complete absorption takes place in from 15
minutes to an hour, depending on conditions. Formerly, many chemists
thought the Hanus solution rather easier to prepare than the Wijs
solution, but the experience of the committee was that the Wijs solution
was no more difficult to prepare than the Hanus. Furthermore, absorption
of iodine from the Wijs solution appeared to take place with greater
promptness and certainty than from the Hanus and was complete in a
shorter time. Results by the Wijs method were also in better agreement
in the case of oils showing high iodine absorption than with the Hanus
solution and showed a slightly higher iodine absorption for the same
length of time. However, the difference was not great. The committee
investigated the question of substitution since it has been suggested
that in case of the Wijs solution substitution of iodine in the organic
molecule might occur, and found no evidence of this in the time required
for the determination, namely, 1/2 hr., or even for a somewhat longer
period. One member of the committee felt that it was not desirable to
introduce the Wijs method into these standard methods since the Hanus
method was already standardized by the Association of Official
Agricultural Chemists, but the committee felt that it must follow the
principle established at the commencement of its work, namely, that of
adopting the method which appeared to be the best from all standpoints,
taking into consideration accuracy, convenience, simplicity, time,
expense, etc., without allowing precedent to have the deciding vote.

IODINE NUMBER, TUNG OIL--The committee has made an extensive study of
the application of the Wijs method to the determination of iodine value
in the case of tung oil with the result that it recommends the method
for this oil but has thought it desirable to limit the conditions under
which the determination is conducted rather narrowly, although
reasonably good results are obtained by the committee method without
making use of the special limitations.

The co-operative work of the committee and the special investigations
conducted by individual members bring out the following points:

_Influence of Temperature_--From 16° C. to 30° C. there is a moderate
increase in the absorption, but above 30° the increase is rather rapid
so that it was thought best to limit the temperature in the case of tung
oil to 20° to 25° C.

_Influence of Time_--The absorption increases with the time but
apparently complete absorption, so far as unsaturated bonds are
concerned, occurs well within one hour's time. Consequently, one hour
was set as the practical limit.

_Influence of Excess_--The excess of iodine solution also tends to
increase the iodine number, hence the Committee thought it necessary to
limit the excess rather rigidly to 55 ± 3 per cent, although with
greater latitude results were reasonably good.

_Influence of Age of Solution_--Old solutions tend to give low results
although up to 2 mo. no great differences were observed. Nevertheless,
it was thought best to limit the age of the solution to 30 days--long
enough for all practical purposes.

_Amount of Sample_--As a practical amount of sample to be weighed out
the Committee decided on 0.15 g. with a tolerance of 0.05 g. in either
direction according to preference. In other words, the amount of sample
to be taken for the determination to be from 0.1 to 0.2 g. in the
discretion of the analyst.

The Committee's study of the Hübl method which has been adopted by the
Society for Testing Materials in the case of tung oil indicates that
this method when applied to tung oil is subject to the same influences
as the Wijs method and it has the additional very serious disadvantage
of requiring a long period of time for absorption which cannot be
considered reasonable for a modern analytical method. When using the
Hübl solution, the absorption is not complete in the case of tung oil
at 3, 7, 18 or even 24 hrs.

The Hanus method in the case of tung oil gives very high and erratic
results, as high as 180 to 240 in ordinary cases for an oil whose true
iodine number is about 165.


MELTING POINT.

A melting point is the temperature at which a solid substance assumes
the liquid condition. If the solid is a pure substance in the
crystalline condition the melting point is sharp and well defined for
any given pressure. With increased pressure the melting point is lowered
or raised, depending on whether the substance contracts or expands in
melting. The lowering or raising of the melting point with pressure is
very slight and ordinarily is not taken into consideration.
Melting-point determinations are commonly carried out under ordinary
atmospheric pressures without correction. The general effect of soluble
impurities is to lower the melting point, and this holds true whether
the impurity has a higher or lower melting point than the pure substance
(solvent). Thus if a small amount of stearic acid be added to liquid
palmitic acid and the solution frozen, the melting point of this solid
will be lower than that of palmitic acid. Likewise the melting point of
stearic acid is lowered by the addition of a small amount of palmitic
acid. A eutectic mixture results when two components solidify
simultaneously at a definite temperature. Such a mixture has a constant
melting point and because of this and also because both solid and liquid
phases have the same composition, eutectic mixtures were formerly looked
upon as compounds. The phenomenon of double melting points has been
observed in the case of a number of glycerides. Such a glyceride when
placed in the usual capillary tube and subjected to increasing
temperature quickly resolidifies only to melt again and remain melted
at a still higher temperature. This phenomenon has not yet been
sufficiently investigated to afford a satisfactory explanation.

Non-crystalline substances such as glass, sealing wax and various other
waxes and wax mixtures, and most colloidal substances do not exhibit a
sharp melting point, but under the application of heat first soften very
gradually and at a considerably higher temperature melt sufficiently to
flow. This phenomenon of melting through a long range of temperature may
be due to the amorphous nature of the substance or to the fact that it
consists of a very large number of components of many different melting
points.

The fats and oils of natural origin, that is, the animal and vegetable
fats and oils, consist of mixtures of glycerides and, generally
speaking, of a considerable number of such components. These components
are crystalline and when separated in the pure state have definite
melting points, although some exhibit the phenomenon of double melting
point. For the most part the naturally occurring glycerides are mixed
glycerides. In the natural fats and oils there are present also certain
higher alcohols, of which cholesterol is characteristic of the animal
fats and oils and phytosterol of many of the vegetable fats and oils. In
addition to the crystalline glycerides and the higher alcohols present
in neutral fats, there are in fats of lower grade, fatty acids, which
are crystalline, and also various non-crystalline impurities of an
unsaponifiable nature, and the presence of these impurities tends to
lower the melting point. They also tend to induce undercooling and when
the liquid fat or oil is being chilled for purposes of solidification or
in determination of titer.

The presence of water, especially when this is thoroughly mixed or
emulsified with a fat or oil, also influences the melting point to a
marked extent, causing the mixture to melt through a longer range of
temperatures than would be the case if the water were absent. This is
particularly true of emulsified fats and oils, such as butter and
oleomargarine, both of which contain, besides water, the solids
naturally present in milk or cream and including casein, milk sugar, and
salts. The melting-point method recommended by the Committee is not
applicable to such emulsions or other watery mixtures and the Committee
has found it impossible to devise an accurate method for making
softening-point or melting-point determinations on products of this
nature. Not only the amount of water present but also the fineness of
its particles, that is, its state of subdivision and distribution, in a
fat or oil influences the softening point or melting point and causes it
to vary widely in different samples.

As a consequence of the foregoing facts, natural fats and oils do not
exhibit a definite melting point, composed as they are of mixtures of
various crystalline glycerides, higher alcohols, fatty acids, and
non-crystalline substances. Therefore, the term melting point when
applied to them requires further definition. They exhibit first a lower
melting point (the melting point of the lowest melting component) or
what might be called the softening point and following this the fat
softens through a shorter or longer range of temperature to the final
melting point at which temperature the fat is entirely liquid. This is
the melting point determined by the Committee's melting-point method.
The range between the softening point and the final melting point varies
greatly with the different fats and oils depending on their chemical
components, the water associated with them, emulsification, etc. In the
case of coconut oil the range between softening point and final melting
point is rather short; in the case of butter, long. Various methods have
been devised to determine the so-called melting point of fats and oils.
Most of these methods, however, determine, not the melting point, but
the softening point or the flow point of the fat and the great
difficulty has been in the past to devise a method which would determine
even this point with reasonable accuracy and so that results could be
easily duplicated. It has been the aim of the Committee to devise a
simple method for the determination of the melting point of fats and
oils, but it should be understood that the term melting point in the
scientific sense is not applicable to natural fats and oils.

FOOTNOTES:

[22] Approved by the Supervisory Committee on Standard Methods of
Analysis of the American Chemical Society.

[23] Live steam must not be turned into tank cars or coils before
samples are drawn, since there is no certain way of telling when coils
are free from leaks.

[24] If there is water present under the solid material this must be
noted and estimated separately.

[25] Boiling point of water at reduced pressures.

 Pressure    Boiling Point   Boiling Point   Boiling Point
  Mm. Hg.      to 1° C.        +15° C.           +20° C.
   100           52° C.         67° C.            72° C.
    90           50             65                70
    80           47             62                67
    70           45             60                65
    60           42             57                62
    50           38             53                58
    40           34             49                54

[26] Results comparable to those of the Standard Method may be obtained
on most fats and oils by drying 5-g. portions of the sample, prepared
and weighed as above, to constant weight in a well-constructed and
well-ventilated air oven held uniformly at a temperature of 105° to 110°
C. The thermometer bulb should be close to the sample. The definition of
constant weight is the same as for the Standard Method.

[27] The following method is suggested by the Committee for routine
control work: Weigh out 5- to 25-g. portions of prepared sample into a
glass or aluminum (_Caution_: Aluminum soap may be formed) beaker or
casserole and heat on a heavy asbestos board over burner or hot plate,
taking care that the temperature of the sample does not go above 130° C.
at any time. During the heating rotate the vessel gently on the board by
hand to avoid sputtering or too rapid evolution of moisture. The proper
length of time of heating is judged by absence of rising bubbles of
steam, by the absence of foam or by other signs known to the operator.
Avoid overheating of sample as indicated by smoking or darkening. Cool
in desiccator and weigh.

By co-operative work in several laboratories, the Committee has
demonstrated that this method can be used and satisfactory results
obtained on coconut oil even when a considerable percentage of free
fatty acids is present, and the method is recommended for this purpose.
Unfortunately on account of the very great personal factor involved, the
Committee cannot establish this method as a preferred method.
Nevertheless, after an operator has learned the technique of the method,
it gives perfectly satisfactory results for ordinary oils and fats,
butter, oleomargarine and coconut oil, and deserves more recognition
than it has heretofore received.

[28] For routine control work, filter paper is sometimes more convenient
than the prepared Gooch crucible, but must be very carefully washed,
especially around the rim, to remove the last traces of fat.

[29] For routine work, an ash may be run on the original fat, and the
soluble mineral matter obtained by deducting the ash on the insoluble
impurities from this. In this case the Gooch crucible should be prepared
with an ignited asbestos mat so that the impurities may be ashed
directly after being weighed. In all cases ignition should be to
constant weight so as to insure complete decomposition of carbonates.

[30] See note on Soluble Mineral Matter following these methods. When
the ash contains phosphates the factor 10 cannot be applied, but the
bases consisting of calcium oxide, etc., must be determined, and the
factor 10 applied to them.

[31] For routine work methyl or denatured ethyl alcohol of approximately
95 per cent strength may be used. With these reagents the end-point is
not sharp.

[32] P. C. McIlhiney, _J. Am. Chem. Soc._, 29 (1917), 1222, gives the
following details for the preparation of the iodine monochloride
solution:

The preparation of the iodine monochloride solution presents no great
difficulty, but it must be done with care and accuracy in order to
obtain satisfactory results. There must be in the solution no sensible
excess either of iodine or more particularly of chlorine, over that
required to form the monochloride. This condition is most satisfactorily
attained by dissolving in the whole of the acetic acid to be used the
requisite quantity of iodine, using a gentle heat to assist the
solution, if it is found necessary, setting aside a small portion of
this solution, while pure and dry chlorine is passed into the remainder
until the halogen content of the whole solution is doubled. Ordinarily
it will be found that by passing the chlorine into the main part of the
solution until the characteristic color of free iodine has just been
discharged there will be a slight excess of chlorine which is corrected
by the addition of the requisite amount of the unchlorinated portion
until all free chlorine has been destroyed. A slight excess of iodine
does little or no harm, but excess of chlorine must be avoided.

[33] The melting point of oils may be determined in general according to
the above procedure, taking into consideration the lower temperature
required.




PLANT AND MACHINERY

Illustrations of machinery and layouts of the plant of a modern
soap-making establishment.

[Illustration: HOIST, LYE TANK, ETC.]

[Illustration: MELTING-OUT TROUGH]

[Illustration: LAUNDRY SOAP PLANT]

[Illustration: DRYING RACK]

[Illustration: SOAP KETTLE]

[Illustration: REMELTER]

[Illustration: CRUTCHER (Cross Section)]

[Illustration: HORIZONTAL CRUTCHER]

[Illustration: CRUTCHER]

[Illustration: WRAPPING MACHINE (LAUNDRY SOAP)]

[Illustration: SLABBER]

[Illustration: CUTTING TABLE]

[Illustration: AUTOMATIC POWER CUTTING TABLE]

[Illustration: AUTOMATIC PRESS (LAUNDRY)]

[Illustration: CUTTING TABLE (HAND)]

[Illustration: CARTON WRAPPING MACHINE]

[Illustration: DRYING RACKS]

[Illustration: SOAP POWDER BOX]

[Illustration: SCOURING SOAP PRESS]

[Illustration: FRAME]

[Illustration: SOAP POWDER EQUIPMENT]

[Illustration: FLUFFY SOAP POWDER EQUIPMENT]

[Illustration: SOAP POWDER MIXER]

[Illustration: SOAP POWDER MILL]

[Illustration: TOILET SOAP EQUIPMENT]

[Illustration: TOILET SOAP DRYER]

[Illustration: MILLING BOX]

[Illustration: AMALGAMATOR]

[Illustration: TOILET SOAP MILL]

[Illustration: TOILET SOAP MILL]

[Illustration: CHIPPER]

[Illustration: PLODDER]

[Illustration: HORIZONTAL CHIPPER]

[Illustration: AMALGAMATOR (IMPROVED)]

[Illustration: PRESS (LETTERING ON 4 SIDES OF CAKE)]

[Illustration: Press (Foot)]

[Illustration: Press (Foot)]

[Illustration: PLODDER]

[Illustration: AUTOMATIC PRESS (TOILET)]

[Illustration: MULTIPLE CAKE CUTTER]

[Illustration: CAKE CUTTER]

[Illustration: CHIPPER]

[Illustration: GLYCERINE DISTILLING PLANT]

[Illustration: CRUDE GLYCERINE PLANT]

[Illustration: H-A FATTY ACID DISTILLING PLANT]




Appendix

Tables marked * are taken from the German Year Book for Soap Industry.


(U. S. BUREAU OF STANDARDS)

THE METRIC SYSTEM.

The fundamental unit of the metric system is the meter (the unit of
length). From this the units of mass (gram) and capacity (liter) are
derived. All other units are the decimal sub-divisions or multiples of
these. These three units are simply related, so that for all practical
purposes the volume of one kilogram of water (one liter) is equal to one
cubic decimeter.


============================================================
                                        |
Prefixes.       Meaning.                |     Units.
________________________________________|___________________
                                        |
Milli- = one thousandth 1-1000     .001 |
Centi- = one hundredth 1-100       .01  | Meter for length.
Deci- = one tenth 1-10             .1   |
Unit = one                        1.    | Gram for mass.
Deka- = ten 10-1                 10.    |
Hecto- = one hundred 100-1      100.    | Liter for capacity.
Kilo- = one thousand 1000-1    1000.    |
============================================================

The metric terms are formed by combining the words "Meter," "Gram" and
"Liter" with the six numerical prefixes.


LENGTH

10 milli-meters mm = 1 centi-meter                  c m

10 centi-meters    = 1 deci-meter                   d m

10 deci-meters     = 1 meter (about 40 inches)        m

10 meters          = 1 deka-meter                 d k m

10 deka-meters     = 1 hecto-meter                  h m

10 hecto-meters    = 1 kilo-meter (about 5/8 mile)  k m


MASS.

10 milli-grams. m g = 1 centi-gram                   c g
10 centi-grams      = 1 deci-gram                    d g
10 deci-grams       = 1 gram (about 15 grains)         g
10 grams            = 1 deka-gram                  d k g
10 Deka-grams       = 1 hecto-gram                   h g
10 hecto-grams      = 1 kilo-gram (about 2 pounds)   k g


CAPACITY.

10 milli-liters. m l = 1 centi-liter                    c l
10 centi-liters      = 1 deci-liter                     d l
10 deci-liters       = 1 liter (about 1 quart)            l
10 liters            = 1 deka-liter                   d k l
10 deka-liters       = 1 hecto-liter (about a barrel)   h l
10 hecto-liters      = 1 kilo-liter                     k l

The square and cubic units are the squares and cubes of the linear
units.

The ordinary unit of land area is the Hectare (about 2-1/2 acres).


U.S. BUREAU OF STANDARDS TABLE OF METRIC EQUIVALENTS


Meter = 39.37 inches.

Legal Equivalent Adopted by Act of Congress July 28, 1866.


LENGTH.

Centimeter              = 0.3937 inch
Meter                   = 3.28 feet
Meter                   = 1.094 yards
Kilometer               = 0.621 statute mile
Kilometer               = 0.5396 nautical mile
Inch                    = 2.540 centimeters
Foot                    = 0.305 meter
Yard                    = 0.914 meter
Statute mile            = 1.61 kilometers
Nautical mile           = 1.853 kilometers


AREA.

Sq. centimeter          = 0.155 sq. inch
Sq. meter               = 10.76 sq. feet
Sq. meter               = 1.196 sq. yards
Hectare                 = 2.47 acres
Sq. kilometer           = 0.386 sq. mile
Sq. inch                = 6.45 sq. centimeters
Sq. foot                = 0.0929 sq. meter
Sq. yard                = 0.836 sq. meter
Acre                    = 0.405 hectare
Sq. mile                = 2.59 sq. kilometers


WEIGHT.

Gram                    = 15.43 grains
Gram                    =  0.772 U. S. apoth. scruple
Gram                    =  0.2572 U. S. apoth. dram
Gram                    =  0.0353 avoir. ounce
Gram                    =  0.03215 troy ounce
Kilogram                =  2.205 avoir. pounds
Kilogram                =  2.679 troy pounds
Metric ton              =  0.984 gross or long ton
Metric ton              =  1.102 short or net tons
Grain                   =  0.064 gram
U. S. apoth. scruple    =  1.296 grams
U. S. apoth. dram       =  3.89 grams
Avoir. ounce            = 28.35 grams
Troy ounce              = 31.10 grams
Avoir. pound            =  0.4536 kilogram
Troy pound              =  0.373 kilogram
Gross or long ton       =  1.016 metric tons
Short or net ton        =  0.907 metric ton


VOLUME.

Cu. centimeter          =  0.0610 cu. inch
Cu. meter               = 35.3 cu. feet
Cu. meter               =  1.308 cu. yards
Cu. inch                = 16.39 cu. centimeters
Cu. foot                =  0.283 cu. meter
Cu. yard                =  0.765 cu. meter


CAPACITY.

Millimeter             =  0.0338 U. S. liq. ounce
Millimeter             =  0.2705 U. S. apoth. dram
Liter                  =  1.057  U. S. liq. quarts
Liter                  =  0.2642 U. S. liq. gallon
Liter                  =  0.908  U. S. dry quart
Dekaliter              =  1.135  U. S. pecks
Hectoliter             =  2.838  U. S. bushels
U. S. liq. ounce       = 29.57   millimeters
U. S. apoth. dram      =  3.70   millimeters
U. S. liq. quarts      =  0.946  liter
U. S. dry quarts       =  1.101  liters
U. S. liq. gallon      =  3.785  liters
U. S. peck             =  0.881  dekaliter
U. S. bushel           =  0.3524 hectoliter


AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.

1 pound = 16 ounces = 256 drams
           1 ounce  =  16   "


TROY (APOTHECARIES') WEIGHT (U. S.)

1 pound = 12 ounces = 96 drams = 288 scruples = 5,760 grains
          1 ounce  =  8 drams =  24 scruples =   480 grains
                       1 dram =   3 scruples =    60 grains
                                  1 scruple  =    20 grains


WINE (APOTHECARIES) LIQUID MEASURE (U. S.)

1 gallon = 8 pints = 128 fl. ozs. = 1,024 fl. drams = 61,440 minims
           1 pint  =  16 fl. ozs. =   128 fl. drams =  7,689 minims
                       1 fl. oz.  =     8 fl. drams =    480 minims
                                        1 fl. dram  =     60 minims

_To find diameter of a circle_ multiply circumference by .31831.

_To find circumference of a circle_, multiply diameter by 3.1416.

_To find area of a circle_, multiply square of diameter by .7854.

_To find surface of a ball_, multiply square of diameter by 3.1416.

_To find side of an equal square_, multiply diameter by .8862.

_To find cubic inches in a ball_, multiply cube of diameter by .5236.

_Doubling the diameter of a pipe_, increases its capacity four times.

_One cubic foot of anthracite coal_ weighs about 53 lbs.

_One cubic foot of bituminous coal_ weighs from 47 to 50 pounds.

_A gallon of water_ (U. S. standard) weighs 8-1/3 pounds and contains
231 cubic inches.

_A cubic foot of water_ contains 7-1/2 gallons, 1728 cubic inches and
weighs 62-1/2 pounds.

_To find the number of pounds of water a cylindrical_ tank contains,
square the diameter, multiply by .785 and then by the height in feet.
This gives the number of cubic feet which multiplied by 62-1/2 gives the
capacity in pounds of water. Divide by 7-1/2 and this gives the capacity
in gallons.

_A horse-power_ is equivalent to raising 33,000 pounds 1 foot per
minute, or 550 pounds 1 foot per second.

_The friction of water in pipes_ is as the square of velocity. The
capacity of pipes is as the square of their diameters; thus, doubling
the diameter of a pipe increases its capacity four times.

_To find the diameter of a pump cylinder_ to move a given quantity of
water per minute (100 feet of piston being the standard of speed),
divide the number of gallons by 4, then extract the square root, and the
product will be the diameter in inches of the pump cylinder.

_To find the horse-power necessary to elevate water_ to a given height,
multiply the weight of the water elevated per minute in pounds by the
height in feet, and divide the product by 33,000 (an allowance should be
added for water friction, and a further allowance for loss in steam
cylinder, say from 20 to 30 per cent).

_To compute the capacity of pumping engines_, multiply the area of water
piston, in inches, by the distance it travels, in inches, in a given
time. Deduct 3 per cent for slip and rod displacement. The product
divided by 231 gives the number of gallons in time named.

_To find the velocity in feet per minute_ necessary to discharge a given
volume of water in a given time, multiply the number of cubic feet of
water by 144 and divide the product by the area of the pipe in inches.

_To find the area of a required pipe_, the volume and velocity of water
being given, multiply the number of cubic feet of water by 144 and
divide the product by the velocity in feet per minute. The area being
found, the diameter can be learned by using any table giving the "area
of circles" and finding the nearest area, opposite to which will be
found the diameter to correspond.


Physical and Chemical Constants of Fixed Oils and Fats.

(FROM LEWKOWITSCH AND OTHER AUTHORITIES.)

______________________________________________________________________________
                       |            |          |             |               |
                       |  Specific  |Specific  |   Melting-  |Solidifying-   |
                       |  gravity   | gravity  |    point.   |    point.     |
                       |  at 15°C.  | at 100°C.|      C.     |       C.      |
_______________________|____________|__________|_____________|_______________|
                       |            |          |             |               |
Linseed oil            | 0.931-0.938|  0.880   | -16° to -26°|      -16°     |
Hemp-seed oil          | 0.925-0.931|          |             |      -27°     |
Walnut oil             | 0.925-0.926|  0.871   |             |      -27°     |
Poppy-seed oil         | 0.924-0.927|  0.873   |             |      -18°     |
Sunflower oil          | 0.924-0.926|  0.919   |             |      -17°     |
Fir-seed oil           | 0.925-0.928|          |             |  -27° to -30° |
Maize oil              | 0.921-0.926|          |             |  -10° to -15° |
Cotton-seed oil        | 0.922-0.930|  0.867   |             |      12°      |
Sesame oil             | 0.923-0.924|  0.871   |             |      -5°      |
Rape-seed oil          | 0.914-0.917|  0.863   |             |  -2° to -10°  |
Black mustard oil      | 0.916-0.920|          |             |     -17.5°    |
Croton oil             | 0.942-0.955|          |             |      -16°     |
Castor oil             | 0.960-0.966|  0.910   |             |  -12° to -18° |
Apricot-kernel oil     | 0.915-0.919|          |             |      -14°     |
Almond oil |           | 0.915-0.920|          |             |  -10° to -20° |
Peanut (arachis) oil   | 0.916-0.920|  0.867   |             |   -3° to -7°  |
Olive oil              | 0.914-0.917|  0.862   |             |       2°      |
Menhaden oil           | 0.927-0.933|          |             |      -4°      |
Cod-liver oil          | 0.922-0.927|  0.874   |             |   0° to -10°  |
Seal oil               | 0.924-0.929|  0.873   |             |       3°      |
Whale oil              | 0.920-0.930|  0.872   |             |      -2°      |
Dolphin oil            | 0.917-0.918|          |             |   5° to -3°   |
Porpoise oil           |    0.926   |  0.871   |             |      -16°     |
Neat's-foot oil        | 0.914-0.916|  0.861   |             |   0° to 1.5°  |
Cotton-seed stearine   | 0.919-0.923|  0.867   |      40°    |  31° to 32.5° |
Palm oil               | 0.921-0.925|  0.856   |  27° to 42° |               |
Cacao butter           | 0.950-0.952|  0.858   |  30° to 33° |   25° to 26°  |
Cocoa-nut oil          | 0.925-0.926|  0.873   |  20° to 26° |   16° to 20°  |
Myrtle wax             |    0.995   |  0.875   |  40° to 44° |   39° to 43°  |
Japan wax              | 0.970-0.980|  0.875   | 51° to 54.5°|      46°      |
Lard                   | 0.931-0.938|  0.861   |  41° to 46° |      29°      |
Bone fat               | 0.914-0.916|          |  21° to 22° |   15° to 17°  |
Tallow                 | 0.943-0.952|  0.860   |  42° to 46° |   35° to 37°  |
Butter fat             | 0.927-0.936|  0.866   | 29.5° to 33°|   19° to 20°  |
Oleomargarine          | 0.924-0.930|  0.859   |             |               |
Sperm oil              | 0.875-0.884|  0.833   |             |      -25°     |
Bottle-nose oil        | 0.879-0.880|  0.827   |             |               |
Carnauba wax           | 0.990-0.999|  0.842   |  84° to 85° |   80° to 81°  |
Wool-fat               |    0.973   |  0.901   |  39° to 42° |  30° to 30.2° |
Beeswax                | 0.958-0.969|  0.822   |  62° to 64° |  60.5° to 62° |
Spermaceti             |    0.960   |  0.812   | 43.5° to 49°| 43.4° to 44.2°|
Chinese wax            |    0.970   |  0.810   | 80.5° to 81°|  80.5° to 81° |
Tung (Chinese wood oil)| 0.936-0.942|          |             |   below -17°  |
Soya-bean oil          | 0.924-0.927|          |             |    8° to 15°  |
_______________________|____________|__________|_____________|_______________|


Physical and Chemical Constants of Fixed Oils and Fats.

(FROM LEWKOWITSCH AND OTHER AUTHORITIES.)

Column Headings:
A: Saponification value.
B: Maumené test.
C: Iodine value.
D: Hehner value.
E: Reichert value.

______________________________________________________________________________
                   |             |             |            |         |      |
                   |     [A]     |     [B]     |     [C]    |   [D]   | [E]  |
___________________|_____________|_____________|____________|_________|______|
                   |             |             |            |         |      |
Linseed oil        |   190-195   |  104°-111°  |   175-190  |         |      |
Hemp-seed oil      |   190-193   |   95°-96°   |     148    |         |      |
Walnut oil         |     195     |   96°-101°  |   144-147  |         |      |
Poppy-seed oil     |     195     |   86°-88°   |   134-141  |  95.38  |      |
Sunflower oil      |   193-194   |   72°-75°   |   120-129  |    95   |      |
Fir-seed oil       |    191.3    |   98°-99°   | 118.9-120  |         |      |
Maize oil          |   188-193   |  56°-60.5°  |  117-125   | 89-95.7 | 2.5  |
Cotton-seed oil    |   191-195   |   68°-77°   |  104-110   |  96-17  |      |
Sesame oil         |   189-193   |   64°-68°   |  105-109   |  95.8   | 0.35 |
Rape-seed oil      |   170-178   |   51°-60°   |   95-105   |    95   |      |
Black mustard oil  |  174-174.6  |   43°-44°   |   96-110   |  95.05  |      |
Croton oil         | 210.3-215   |             | 101.7-104  |    89   | 13.5 |
Castor oil         |   178-186   |   46°-47°   |  83.4-85.9 |         | 1.4  |
Apricot-kernel oil | 192.2-193.1 |  42.5°-46°  |   100-107  |         |      |
Almond oil         | 190.5-195.4 |   51°-54°   |    93-97   |  96.2   |      |
Peanut (arachis)   |             |             |            |         |      |
  oil              |   190-197   |   45°-49°   |    85-98   |  95.86  |      |
Olive oil          |   191-196   | 41.5°-45.5° |  80.6-84.5 |  95.43  | 0.3  |
Menhaden oil       | 189.3-192   |  123°-128°  |   140-170  |         | 1.2  |
Cod-liver oil      |   182-187   |  102°-103°  |   154-180  |  95.3   |      |
Seal oil           |   190-196   |     92°     |   127-140  |  94.2   | 0.22 |
Whale-oil          |   188-193   |   91°-92°   |   110-136  |  93.5   | 2.04 |
Dolphin  {Body oil |    197.3    |             |    99.5    |  93.07  | 5.6  |
  oil    {Jaw oil  |     200     |             |    32.8    |  66.28  |65.92 |
Porpoise {Body oil |   216-218.8 |     50°     |   119.4    |         |23.45 |
  oil    {Jaw oil  |    253.7    |             |    49.6    |  68.41  |65.8  |
Neat's-foot oil    |    194.3    |  47°-48.5°  |  69.3-70.4 |         |      |
Cotton-seed        |             |             |            |         |      |
  stearine.        | 194.6-195.1 |     48°     |  88.7-92.8 |  96.3   |      |
Palm oil           | 196.3-202   |             |    53-57   |  95.6   | 0.5  |
Cacao butter       | 192.2-193.5 |             |    32-41   |  94.59  | 1.6  |
Cocoa-nut oil      |   250-253   |             |   8.5-9.3  |  88.6   | 3.7  |
Myrtle wax         | 205.7-211.7 |             |     2.9    |         |      |
Japan wax          |   220-222.4 |             |   4.2-8.5  |  90.6   |      |
Lard               | 195.3-196.6 |   27°-32°   |    57-70   |   96    |      |
Bone fat           |    190.9    |             |  46.3-49.6 |         |      |
Tallow             |   195-198   |             |    36-47   |  95.6   | 0.25 |
Butter fat         | 221.5-227   |             |    26-35   |  87.5   |28.78 |
Oleomargarine      |   194-203.7 |             |   55.3-60  |  95-96  | 2.6  |
Sperm oil          | 132.5-147   |   47°-51°   |     84     |         | 1.3  |
Bottle-nose oil    |   126-134   |   41°-47°   |   77.4-82  |         | 1.4  |
Carnauba wax       |    80-84    |             |    13.5    |         |      |
Wool-fat           |  98.2-102.4 |             |    25-28   |         |      |
Beeswax            |    91-96    |             |   8.3-11   |         |      |
Spermaceti         |     128     |             |            |         |      |
Chinese wax        |     63      |             |            |         |      |
Tung (Chinese      |             |             |            |         |      |
  wood oil)        |     193     |             |   150-165  |         |      |
Soya-bean oil      | 190.6-192.9 |   59°-61°   | 121.3-124  |  95.5   |      |
___________________|_____________|_____________|____________|_________|______|


*Temperature Correction Table for Hehner's Concentrated Bichromate
Solution for Glycerine Analysis

__________________________________________
            |                  |
     A      |         f        |
Temperature | Corrected Volume | Logarithm
            |       1 c.c.     |
____________|__________________|__________
            |                  |
   11° C    |    0.9980 ccm    |   99913
   12° "    |    0.9985 "      |   99935
   13° "    |    0.9990 "      |   99956
   14° "    |    0.9995 "      |   99978
   15° "    |    1.0000 "      |   00000
   16° "    |    1.0005 "      |   00022
   17° "    |    1.0010 "      |   00043
   18° "    |    1.0015 "      |   00065
   19° "    |    1.0020 "      |   00087
   20° "    |    1.0025 "      |   00108
   21° "    |    1.0030 "      |   00130
   22° "    |    1.0035 "      |   00152
   23° "    |    1.0040 "      |   00173
____________|__________________|__________


*Table of Important Fatty Acids

_______________________________________________________________________________
           |                   |      |                      |       |
           |                   |      |     Boiling Point    |       |
           |                   |      |______________________|       |Neutral-
           |                   | Mol. |          |           | Melt- |ization
   Name    |      Formula      | Wt.  | Ordinary |  100 mm   |  ing  |value
           |                   |      | Pressure | Pressure  |   Pt. | Mg. KOH
___________|___________________|______|__________|___________|_______|__________
           |                   |      |          |           |       |
Butyric    | C_{4}H_{8}O_{2}   |  88  |  162.3   |           |       |637.5
Caproic    | C_{6}H_{12}O_{2}  | 116  |  199.7   |           |       |483.6
Caprylic   | C_{8}H_{16}O_{2}  | 144  | 236-237  |           | 16.5  |389.6
Capric     | C_{10}H_{20}O_{2} | 172  | 268-270  | 199.5-200 | 31.3  |326.2
Lauric     | C_{12}H_{24}O_{2} | 200  |          |    225    | 43.6  |280.5
Myristic   | C_{14}H_{28}O_{2} | 228  |          |   250.5   | 53.8  |246.1
Palmitic   | C_{16}H_{32}O_{2} | 256  |          |   268.5   |  62   |219.1
Stearic    | C_{18}H_{36}O_{2} | 284  |          |    291    |  69.2 |197.5
Arachidic  | C_{20}H_{40}O_{2} | 302  |          |           |  75   |185.8
Behenic    | C_{22}H_{44}O_{2} | 330  |          |           | 77-78 |170.0
Cerotic    | C_{27}H_{54}O_{2} | 400  |          |           |  78   |140.25
Melissic   | C_{30}H_{60}O_{2} | 442  |          |           |  90   |126.5
Oleic      | C_{18}H_{34}O_{2} | 282  |          | 185.5-286 |  14   |198.9
Erucic     | C_{22}H_{42}O_{2} | 338  |          |           | 33-34 |165.9
Linolic    | C_{18}H_{32}O_{2} | 280  |          |           |       |200.4
Linolenic  | C_{18}H_{30}O_{2} | 278  |          |           |       |201.5
Ricinoleic | C_{18}H_{34}O_{3} | 298  |          |           |       |181.6
___________|___________________|______|__________|___________|_______|__________


*Comparison of Thermometer Scales

n Degree Celsius = 4/5n Degree Reaumur = 32 + 9/5n Degree Fahrenheit

n Degree Reaumur = 5/4n Degree Celsius = 32 + 9/4n Degree Fahrenheit

n Degree Fahrenheit = 5/9 (n - 32) Degree Celsius = 4/9 (n - 32) Deg. R

=============================================================================
 C.   R.     F.     |  C.  R.    F.    | C.  R.    F.     |  C.   R.     F.
--------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------
-20  -16     -4     | 20  16     68    | 60  48    140    | 100   80    212
-19  -15.2   -2.2   | 21  16.8   69.8  | 61  48.8  141.8  | 101   80.8 213.8
-18  -14.4   -0.4   | 22  17.6   71.6  | 62  49.6  143.6  | 102   81.6 215.6
-17  -13.6    1.4   | 23  18.4   73.4  | 63  50.4  145.4  | 103   82.4 217.4
-16  -12.8    3.2   | 24  19.2   75.2  | 64  51.2  147.2  | 104   83.2 219.2|
                    |                  |                  |
-15  -12      5     | 25  20     77    | 65  52    149    | 105   84    221
-14  -11.2    6.8   | 26  20.8   78.8  | 66  52.8  150.8  | 106   84.8 222.8
-13  -10.4    8.6   | 27  21.6   80.6  | 67  53.6  152.6  | 107   85.6 224.6
-12   -9.6   10.4   | 28  22.4   82.4  | 68  54.4  154.4  | 108   86.4 226.4
-11   -8.8   12.2   | 29  23.2   84.2  | 69  55.2  156.2  | 109   87.2 228.2
                    |                  |                  |
-10   -8     14     | 30  24     86    | 70  56    158    | 110   88    230
 -9   -7.2   15.8   | 31  24.8   87.8  | 71  56.8  159.8  | 111   88.8 231.8
 -8   -6.4   17.6   | 32  25.6   89.6  | 72  57.6  161.6  | 112   89.6 233.6
 -7   -5.6   19.4   | 33  26.4   91.4  | 73  58.4  163.4  | 113   90.4 235.4
 -6   -4.8   21.2   | 34  27.2   93.2  | 74  59.2  165.2  | 114   91.2 237.2
                    |                  |                  |
 -5   -4     23     | 35  28     95    | 75  60    167    | 115   92    239
 -4   -3.2   24.8   | 36  28.8   96.8  | 76  60.8  168.8  | 116   92.8 240.8
 -3   -2.4   26.6   | 37  29.6   98.6  | 77  61.6  170.6  | 117   93.6 242.6
 -2   -1.6   28.4   | 38  30.4  100.4  | 78  62.4  172.4  | 118   94.4 244.4
 -1   -0.8   30.2   | 39  31.2  102.2  | 79  63.2  174.2  | 119   95.2 246.2
                    |                  |                  |
  0    0     32     | 40  32    104    | 80  64    176    | 120   96    248
  1    0.8   33.8   | 41  32.8  105.8  | 81  64.8  177.8  | 121   96.8 249.8
  2    1.6   35.6   | 42  33.6  107.6  | 82  65.6  179.6  | 122   97.6 252.6
  3    2.4   37.4   | 43  34.4  109.4  | 83  66.4  181.4  | 123   98.4 253.4
  4    3.2   39.2   | 44  35.2  111.2  | 84  67.2  183.2  | 124   99.2 255.2
                    |                  |                  |
  5    4     41     | 45  36    113    | 85  68    185    | 125  100    257
  6    4.8   42.8   | 46  36.8  114.8  | 86  68.8  186.8  | 126  100.8 258.8
  7    5.6   44.6   | 47  37.6  116.6  | 87  69.6  188.6  | 127  101.6 260.6
  8    6.4   46.4   | 48  38.4  118.4  | 88  70.4  190.4  | 128  102.4 262.4
  9    7.2   48.2   | 49  39.2  120.2  | 89  71.2  192.2  | 129  103.2 264.2
                    |                  |                  |
 10    8     50     | 50  40    122    | 90  72    194    | 130  104    266
 11    8.8   51.8   | 51  40.8  123.8  | 91  72.8  195.8  | 131  104.8 267.8
 12    9.6   53.6   | 52  41.6  125.6  | 92  73.6  197.6  | 132  105.6 269.6
 13   10.4   55.4   | 53  42.4  127.4  | 93  74.4  199.4  | 133  106.4 271.4
 14   11.2   57.2   | 54  43.2  129.2  | 94  75.2  201.2  | 134  107.2 273.2
                    |                  |                  |
 15   12     59     | 55  44    131    | 95  76    203    | 135  108    275
 16   12.8   60.8   | 56  44.8  132.8  | 96  76.8  204.8  | 136  108.8 276.8
 17   13.6   62.6   | 57  45.6  134.6  | 97  77.6  206.6  | 137  109.6 278.6
 18   14.4   64.4   | 58  46.4  136.4  | 98  78.4  208.4  | 138  110.4 280.4
 19   15.2   66.2   | 59  47.2  138.2  | 99  79.2  210.2  | 139  111.2 282.2
===============================================================================


*Quantities of Alkali Required for Saponification of Fats of Average
Molecular Weight 670

(Cocoanut Oil, Palmkernel Oil)

_________________________________________________
      |                     |                   |
      |    Liters Alkali    |   Liters Alkali   |
      |      Solution       |     Solution      |
Kilos |     Sp. Gr. 1.1     |    Sp. Gr. 1.2    |
______|_____________________|___________________|
      |          |          |         |         |
      |   NaOH   |    KOH   |   NaOH  |   KOH   |
______|__________|__________|_________|_________|
      |          |          |         |         |
 1000 |  1875.83 |  1902.99 |  844.67 |  930.35 |
 2000 |  3751.66 |  3805.97 | 1689.35 | 1860.70 |
 3000 |  5627.50 |  5708.96 | 2534.02 | 2791.04 |
 4000 |  7508.33 | 7611.94  | 3378.69 | 3721.39 |
 5000 |  9379.16 |  9514.93 | 4223.37 | 4651.74 |
 6000 | 11254.99 | 11417.91 | 5068.04 | 5582.09 |
 7000 | 13130.82 | 13320.90 | 5912.71 | 6512.44 |
 8000 | 15006.66 | 15223.88 | 6757.38 | 7442.78 |
 9000 | 16882.49 | 17126.87 | 7602.06 | 8373.13 |
10000 | 18758.32 | 19029.85 | 8446.73 | 9303.48 |
______|__________|__________|_________|_________|

______________________________________________
      |                   |
      |   Liters Alkali   |  Liters Alkali
      |     Solution      |    Solution
Kilos |    Sp. Gr. 1.3    |  Sp. Gr. 1.355
______|___________________|___________________
      |         |         |         |
      |   NaOH  |   KOH   |   NaOH  |   KOH
______|_________|_________|_________|_________
      |         |         |         |
 1000 |  510.27 |  622.71 |  409.61 |  517.97
 2000 | 1020.54 | 1245.41 |  819.21 | 1035.95
 3000 | 1530.81 | 1868.12 | 1228.82 | 1553.92
 4000 | 2041.01 | 2490.83 | 1638.43 | 2071.90
 5000 | 2551.35 | 3113.54 | 2048.04 | 2589.87
 6000 | 3061.61 | 3736.24 | 2457.65 | 3107.84
 7000 | 3571.88 | 4358.95 | 2867.26 | 3625.82
 8000 | 4082.15 | 4981.66 | 3276.86 | 4143.79
 9000 | 4592.42 | 5604.36 | 3886.47 | 4661.77
10000 | 5102.69 | 6227.02 | 4096.08 | 5179.74
______|_________|_________|_________|_________


*Quantities of Alkali Required for Saponification of Fats of Average
Molecular Weight 860

(Tallow, Cottonseed Oil, Olive Oil, Etc.)

_________________________________________________
      |                     |                   |
      |    Liters Alkali    |   Liters Alkali   |
      |      Solution       |     Solution      |
Kilos |     Sp. Gr. 1.1     |    Sp. Gr. 1.2    |
______|_____________________|___________________|
      |          |          |         |         |
      |   NaOH   |    KOH   |   NaOH  |   KOH   |
______|__________|__________|_________|_________|
      |          |          |         |         |
 1000 |  1461.40 |  1482.56 |  658.05 |  724.81 |
 2000 |  2922.81 |  2965.12 | 1316.12 | 1449.61 |
 3000 |  4384.21 |  4447.67 | 1974.18 | 2174.42 |
 4000 |  5845.62 |  5930.23 | 2632.24 | 2899.22 |
 5000 |  7307.02 |  7412.79 | 3290.80 | 3624.03 |
 6000 |  8768.42 |  8895.85 | 3948.35 | 4348.84 |
 7000 | 10229.83 | 10377.91 | 4606.41 | 5073.64 |
 8000 | 11691.23 | 11860.45 | 5264.47 | 5798.45 |
 9000 | 13152.64 | 13343.02 | 5922.53 | 6523.25 |
10000 | 14614.04 | 14825.58 | 6580.59 | 7248.06 |
______|__________|__________|_________|_________|
______________________________________________
      |                   |
      |   Liters Alkali   |  Liters Alkali
      |     Solution      |    Solution
Kilos |    Sp. Gr. 1.3    |  Sp. Gr. 1.355
______|___________________|___________________
      |         |         |         |
      |   NaOH  |   KOH   |   NaOH  |   KOH
______|_________|_________|_________|_________
      |         |         |         |
 1000 |  397.54 |  485.13 |  319.11 |  403.54
 2000 |  795.07 |  970.27 |  638.23 |  807.08
 3000 | 1192.61 | 1455.40 |  957.34 | 1210.61
 4000 | 1590.14 | 1940.53 | 1276.45 | 1614.15
 5000 | 1987.68 | 2425.67 | 1595.57 | 2017.69
 6000 | 2385.21 | 2910.80 | 1914.68 | 2421.23
 7000 | 2782.75 | 3395.93 | 2233.79 | 2824.77
 8000 | 3180.28 | 3881.06 | 2552.90 | 3228.30
 9000 | 3577.82 | 4366.20 | 2872.02 | 3631.84
10000 | 3975.35 | 4851.33 | 3191.13 | 4035.38
______|_________|_________|_________|_________


DENSITY AND STRENGTH OF SULPHURIC ACID (SIDERSKY).

Column Headings:
A: Degrees Twaddell
B: Sp. Gr. at 15° C.
C: % of pure acid (H_{2}SO_{4}).
D: Equivalent (in cc.) of a kilo of pure acid.
E: Equivalent (in cc.) of a liter of pure acid.


=========================================

 [A]    [B]     [C]      [D]        [E]
_________________________________________

1     1.007     1.9     52.620     96.930
3     1.014     2.8     35.710     66.450
4     1.022     3.8     25.650     47.230
6     1.029     4.8     20.410     37.582
8     1.037     5.8     16.670     30.690
9     1.045     6.8     14.085     25.938
10    1.052     7.8     12.198     22.460
12    1.062     8.8     10.755     19.803
13    1.067     9.8      9.524     17.540
15    1.075    10.9      8.547     15.740
17    1.083    11.9      7.752     14.278
18    1.091    13.0      7.042     12.969
20    1.100    14.1      6.452     11.882
22    1.108    15.2      5.953     10.962
23    1.116    16.2      5.526     10.177
25    1.125    17.3      5.405      9.954
27    1.134    18.5      4.76       8.770
29    1.142    19.6      4.465      8.223
30    1.152    20.8      4.184      7.723
32    1.162    22.2      3.876      7.138
34    1.171    23.3      3.663      6.745
36    1.180    24.5      3.541      6.521
38    1.190    25.8      3.258      5.999
40    1.200    27.1      3.077      5.666
42    1.210    28.4      2.907      5.353
44    1.220    29.6      2.770      5.102
46    1.231    31.0      2.618      4.865
48    1.241    32.2      2.500      4.604
50    1.252    33.4      2.392      4.406
53    1.263    34.7      2.283      4.205
55    1.274    36.0      2.179      4.012
57    1.285    37.4      2.079      3.829
60    1.297    38.8      1.988      3.661
62    1.308    40.2      1.905      3.508
64    1.320    41.6      1.821      3.354
66    1.332    43.0      1.745      3.214
69    1.345    44.4      1.665      3.085
71    1.357    45.5      1.621      2.985
74    1.370    46.9      1.558      2.869
77    1.383    48.3      1.497      2.757
80    1.397    49.8      1.436      2.646
82    1.410    51.2      1.386      2.551
85    1.424    52.6      1.335      2.459
88    1.438    54.0      1.287      2.370
91    1.453    55.4      1.237      2.270
94    1.468    56.9      1.195      2.200
97    1.483    58.3      1.156      2.130
100   1.498    59.6      1.116      2.050
103   1.514    61.0      1.080      1.980
106   1.530    62.5      1.045      1.930
108   1.540    64.0      1.010      1.860
113   1.563    65.5      0.975      1.800
116   1.580    67.0      0.950      1.740
120   1.597    68.6      0.917      1.690
123   1.615    70.0      0.888      1.630
127   1.634    71.6      0.855      1.570
130   1.652    73.2      0.845      1.520
134   1.671    74.7      0.800      1.470
138   1.691    76.4      0.774      1.430
142   1.711    78.1      0.749      1.390
146   1.732    79.9      0.722      1.320
151   1.753    81.7      0.705      1.280
155   1.774    84.1      0.672      1.235
160   1.798    86.5      0.639      1.190
164   1.819    89.7      0.609      1.120
168   1.842   100.0      0.544      1.000


*Densities of Potassium Carbonate Solutions at 15 C (Gerlach)

=======================
        |             |
        |  Per cent   |
Sp. Gr. |   of pure   |
        | K_{2}CO_{3} |
________|_____________|
        |             |
1.00914 |    1        |
1.01829 |    2        |
1.02743 |    3        |
1.03658 |    4        |
1.04572 |    5        |
1.05513 |    6        |
1.06454 |    7        |
1.07396 |    8        |
1.08337 |    9        |
1.09278 |   10        |
1.10258 |   11        |
1.11238 |   12        |
1.12219 |   13        |
1.13199 |   14        |
1.14179 |   15        |
1.15200 |   16        |
1.16222 |   17        |
1.17243 |   18        |
1.18265 |   19        |
1.19286 |   20        |
1.20344 |   21        |
1.21402 |   22        |
1.22459 |   23        |
1.23517 |   24        |
1.24575 |   25        |
1.25681 |   26        |
1.26787 |   27        |
1.27893 |   28        |
1.28999 |   29        |
1.30105 |   30        |
1.31261 |   31        |
1.32417 |   32        |
1.33573 |   33        |
1.34729 |   34        |
1.35885 |   35        |
1.37082 |   36        |
1.38279 |   37        |
1.39476 |   38        |
1.40673 |   39        |
1.41870 |   40        |
1.43104 |   41        |
1.44338 |   42        |
1.45573 |   43        |
1.46807 |   44        |
1.48041 |   45        |
1.49314 |   46        |
1.50588 |   47        |
1.51861 |   48        |
1.53135 |   49        |
1.54408 |   50        |
1.55728 |   51        |
1.57048 |   52        |
1.57079 |   53.024    |
________|_____________|


*Constants of Certain Fatty Acids and Triglycerides

=========================================================
              |          |            |
              |          |            |  Per cent Yield
Triglycerides | Mol. Wt. | Mol. Wt.   |__________________
      of      | of Fatty | of Tri-    |       |
              | of Fatty | glycerides | Fatty | Glycerine
              |          |            | Acid  |
______________|__________|____________|_______|___________
              |          |            |       |
Stearic Acid  |    284   |     890    | 95.73 |  10.34
Oleic Acid    |    282   |     884    | 95.70 |  10.41
Margaric Acid |    270   |     848    | 95.52 |  10.85
Palmitic Acid |    256   |     806    | 95.28 |  11.42
Myristic Acid |    228   |     722    | 94.47 |  12.74
Lauric Acid   |    200   |     638    | 94.04 |  14.42
Capric Acid   |    172   |     594    | 93.14 |  15.48
Caproic Acid  |    116   |     386    | 90.16 |  23.83
Butyric Acid  |     88   |     302    | 87.41 |  30.46
______________|__________|____________|_______|___________


PERCENTAGES OF SOLID CAUSTIC SODA AND CAUSTIC POTASH IN CAUSTIC LYES
ACCORDING TO BAUME SCALE.

Degrees    %     %
 Baumé.  NaOH   KOH

 1       0.61   0.90
 2       0.93   1.70
 3       2.00   2.60
 4       2.71   3.50
 5       3.35   4.50
 6       4.00   5.60
 7       4.556  6.286
 8       5.29   7.40
 9       5.87   8.20
10       6.55   9.20
11       7.31  10.10
12       8.00  10.90
13       8.68  12.00
14       9.42  12.90
15      10.06  13.80
16      10.97  14.80
17      11.84  15.70
18      12.64  16.50
19      13.55  17.60
20      14.37  18.60
21      15.13  19.50
22      15.91  20.50
23      16.77  21.40
24      17.67  22.50
25      18.58  23.30
26      19.58  24.20
27      20.59  25.10
28      21.42  26.10
29      22.64  27.00
30      23.67  28.00
31      24.81  28.90
32      25.80  29.80
33      26.83  30.70
34      27.80  31.80
35      28.83  32.70
36      29.93  33.70
37      31.22  34.90
38      32.47  35.90
39      33.69  36.90
40      34.96  37.80
41      36.25  38.90
42      37.53  39.90
43      38.80  40.90
44      39.99  42.10
45      41.41  43.40
46      42.83  44.60
47      44.38  45.80
48      46.15  47.10
49      47.58  48.25
50      49.02  49.40


GLYCERINE CONTENT OF MORE COMMON OILS AND FATS USED IN SOAP MAKING.

   Kind.          Theoretical     Average Free     % Pure        Yield
                 Yield of Pure   Fatty Acid in    Glycerine     Soap Lye
                 Glycerine of      Commercial   in Commercial   80% Crude
                  Neutral Oil        Oil.            Oil.       Glycerine.
                    or Fat.

Beef Tallow           10.7             5           10.2         12.75
Bone Grease           10.5            20-50         5.2- 8.4     6.5-10.5
Castor Oil             9.8           0.5-10         8.8- 9.8    11.0-12.45
Cocoanut Oil          13.9             3-5         13.2-13.5    16.5-16.9
Cocoanut Oil Off                      15-40         8.3-11.8    10.37-14.75
Corn Oil              10.4             1-10         9.3-10.3    11.62-12.9
Cottonseed Oil        10.6            Trace        10.6         13.25
Hog Grease            10.6           0.5-1         10.5-10.6    13.12-13.25
Horse Grease          10.6             1-3         10.5-10.6    13.12-13.25
Olive Oil             10.3             2-25         7.7-10.2     9.62-12.75
Olive Foots                           30-60           4-7           5-8.75
Palm Oil              11.0            10-50         5.5-10       6.87-12.5
Palmkernel Oil        13.3             4-8         12.2-12.8    15.25-16
Peanut Oil            10.4             5-20         8.3-9.9     10.37-12.37
Soya Bean Oil         10.4             2           10.2         12.75
Train Oil             10.0             2-20           8-9.8     10.0-12.25
Vegetable Tallow      10.9             1-3         10.5-10.8    13.12-13.5


*Table of Specific Gravities of Pure Commercial Glycerine with
Corresponding Percentage of Water. Temperature 15 C.

------------------+------------------
 Sp. Gr.  % Water | Sp. Gr.  % Water
  1.262      0    |  1.160      38
  1.261      1    |  1.157      39
  1.258      2    |  1.155      40
  1.255      3    |  1.152      41
  1.2515     4    |  1.149      42
  1.250      5    |  1.1464     43
  1.2467     6    |  1.1437     44
  1.2450     7    |  1.141      45
  1.243      8    |  1.1377     46
  1.241      9    |  1.1353     47
  1.237     10    |  1.1326     48
  1.235     11    |  1.1304     49
  1.2324    12    |  1.127      50
  1.229     13    |  1.125      51
  1.2265    14    |  1.1224     52
  1.2245    15    |  1.1204     53
  1.2225    16    |  1.117      54
  1.2185    17    |  1.114      55
  1.2174    18    |  1.112      56
  1.2142    19    |  1.109      57
  1.211     20    |  1.106      58
  1.207     21    |  1.103      59
  1.203     22    |  1.1006     60
  1.2004    23    |  1.088      65
  1.198     24    |  1.075      70
  1.195     25    |  1.0623     75
  1.1923    26    |  1.049      80
  1.189     27    |  1.0365     85
  1.188     28    |  1.0243     90
  1.1846    29    |  1.0218     91
  1.182     30    |  1.0192     92
  1.179     31    |  1.0168     93
  1.176     32    |  1.0147     94
  1.1734   33     |  1.0125     95
  1.171    34     |  1.01       96
  1.168    35     |  1.0074     97
  1.165    36     |  1.0053     98
  1.163    37     |  1.0026     99
------------------+------------------


Table of Percentage, Specific Gravity and Beaume Degree of Pure
Glycerine Solutions

=========+===========+===========++=========+===========+===========
Per cent |Sp. Gr.    |Degree     ||Per cent |Sp. Gr.    |Degree
Water    |Champion   |Beaume     ||Water    |Champion   |Beaume
         |and Pellet |(Berthelot)||         |and Pellet |(Berthelot)
=========+===========+===========++=========+===========+===========
     0   |    1.2640 |      31.2 ||    11.0 |    1.2350 |      28.6
     0.5 |    1.2625 |      31.0 ||    11.5 |    1.2335 |      28.4
     1.0 |    1.2612 |      30.9 ||    12.0 |    1.2322 |      28.3
     1.5 |    1.2600 |      30.8 ||    12.5 |    1.2307 |      28.2
     2.0 |    1.2585 |      30.7 ||    13.0 |    1.2295 |      28.0
     2.5 |    1.2575 |      30.6 ||    13.5 |    1.2280 |      27.8
     3.0 |    1.2560 |      30.4 ||    14.0 |    1.2270 |      27.7
     3.5 |    1.2545 |      30.3 ||    14.5 |    1.2255 |      27.6
     4.0 |    1.2532 |      30.2 ||    15.0 |    1.2242 |      27.4
     4.5 |    1.2520 |      30.1 ||    15.5 |    1.2230 |      27.3
     5.0 |    1.2505 |      30.0 ||    16.0 |    1.2217 |      27.2
     5.5 |    1.2490 |      29.9 ||    16.5 |    1.2202 |      27.0
     6.0 |    1.2480 |      29.8 ||    17.0 |    1.2190 |      26.9
     6.5 |    1.2465 |      29.7 ||    17.5 |    1.2177 |      26.8
     7.0 |    1.2455 |      29.6 ||    18.0 |    1.2165 |      26.7
     7.5 |    1.2440 |      29.5 ||    18.5 |    1.2150 |      26.5
     8.0 |    1.2427 |      29.3 ||    19.0 |    1.2137 |      26.4
     8.5 |    1.2412 |      29.2 ||    19.5 |    1.2125 |      26.3
     9.0 |    1.2400 |      29.0 ||    20.0 |    1.2112 |      26.2
     9.5 |    1.2390 |      28.9 ||    20.5 |    1.2100 |      26.0
    10.0 |    1.2375 |      28.8 ||    21.0 |    1.2085 |      25.0
    10.5 |    1.2362 |      28.7 ||         |           |
=========+===========+===========++=========+===========+===========


*Table of Specific Gravities of Pure Glycerine Solutions with
Corresponding Beaume Degree and Percent Water

--------+--------+-------+---------+--------+--------
Per cent| Sp. Gr.| Degree| Percent | Sp. Gr.| Degree
Water   |        | Beaume|  Water  |        | Beaume
--------+--------+-------+---------+--------+--------
        |        |       |         |        |
  0.0   | 1.2640 |  31.2 |    1.0  | 1.2612 |  30.9
  0.5   | 1.2625 |  31.0 |    1.5  | 1.2600 |  30.8
  2.0   | 1.2585 |  30.7 |   12.0  | 1.2322 |  28.3
  2.5   | 1.2575 |  30.6 |   12.5  | 1.2307 |  28.2
  3.0   | 1.2560 |  30.4 |   13.0  | 1.2295 |  28.0
  3.5   | 1.2545 |  30.3 |   13.5  | 1.2280 |  27.8
  4.0   | 1.2532 |  30.2 |   14.0  | 1.2270 |  27.7
  4.5   | 1.2520 |  30.1 |   14.5  | 1.2255 |  27.6
  5.0   | 1.2505 |  30.0 |   15.0  | 1.2242 |  27.4
  5.5   | 1.2490 |  29.9 |   15.5  | 1.2230 |  27.3
  6.0   | 1.2480 |  29.8 |   16.0  | 1.2217 |  27.2
  6.5   | 1.2465 |  29.7 |   16.5  | 1.2202 |  27.0
  7.0   | 1.2455 |  29.6 |   17.0  | 1.2190 |  26.9
  7.5   | 1.2440 |  29.5 |   17.5  | 1.2177 |  26.8
  8.0   | 1.2427 |  29.3 |   18.0  | 1.2165 |  26.7
  8.5   | 1.2412 |  29.2 |   18.5  | 1.2150 |  26.5
  9.0   | 1.2400 |  29.0 |   19.0  | 1.2137 |  26.4
  9.5   | 1.2390 |  28.9 |   19.5  | 1.2125 |  26.3
 10.0   | 1.2375 |  28.8 |   20.0  | 1.2112 |  26.2
 10.5   | 1.2362 |  28.7 |   20.5  | 1.2100 |  26.0
 11.0   | 1.2350 |  28.6 |   21.0  | 1.2085 |  25.9
 11.5   | 1.2335 |  28.4 |         |        |
--------+--------+-------+---------+--------+--------




INDEX


A

Acetin process for the determination of glycerol, 155.

Acid, Clupanodonic, 20.

Acid, Hydrochloric, 111.

Acid, Lauric, 2.

Acid, Myristic, 2.

Acid, Napthenic, 24.

Acid, Oleic, 15, 19.

Acid, Palmitic, 2.

Acid, Pinic, 22.

Acid, Resin, 144.

Acid, Stearic, 15, 19.

Acid, Sulfuric, 112.

Acid, Sylvic, 22.

Acid saponification, 120.

Air bleaching of palm oil, 12.

Albuminous matter, Removal from tallow, 6.

Alcohol, Denatured, 82.

Alcoholic method for free alkali in soap, 139.

Alkali Blue 6 B, indicator, 129.

Alkali, Total, determination of in soap, 147.

Alkalis, 25.

Alkalis used in soap making,
  Testing of, 134.

Amalgamator, 33.

Analysis, Glycerine, International, 150.

Analysis, Soap, 137.

Analysis, Standard methods for fats and oils, 165-196.

Aqueous saponification, 121.

Arachis oil, 79.

Autoclave saponification, 118.

Automobile soaps, 41.


B

Barrels, sampling, 168.

Baumé scale, 25.

Bayberry wax, Use in shaving soap, 89.

Bichromate Process for glycerol determination, 160.

Bleaching, Fullers' earth process for tallow, 4.

Bleaching palm oil by bichromate method, 9.

Bleaching palm oil by air, 12.

Bosshard & Huggenberg method for determination of free alkali, 140.

Bunching of soap, 52.


C

Candelite, 96.

Candle tar, 125.

Carbolic soap, 77.

Carbon Dioxide, Formation of in carbonate saponification, 45.

Carbonate, potassium, 29.

Carbonate, saponification, 35, 45.

Carbonate, sodium, 28.

Castile soap, 79.

Castor oil ferment, 121.

Castor oil, Use of in transparent soaps, 83.

Caustic potash, 26.

Caustic potash, Electrolytic, 27.

Caustic soda, 26.

Changes in soap-making, 36.

Chemist, Importance of, 127.

Chipper, Soap, 32.

Chip soap, 54.

Chip soap, Cold made, 55.

Chip soap, Unfilled, 56.

Chrome bleaching of palm oil, 9.

Cloud test for oil, Standard method, 182-183.

Clupanodonic acid, 20.

Cocoanut oil, 6.

Cold cream soap, 78.

Cold made chip soaps, 55.

Cold made toilet soaps, 72.

Cold made transparent soaps, 84.

Cold process, 35, 43.

Colophony, 22.

Coloring soap, 75.

Copra, 7.

Corn oil, 14.

Corrosive sublimate, 78.

Cotton goods. Soaps used for, 103.

Cottonseed oil, 14.

Cream, Shaving, 90.

Crude glycerine, 113.

Crutcher, 32.

Curd soap, 71.

Cutting table, 32.


D

Determination of free fatty acid, 128.

Determination of unsaponifiable matter, 132.

Distillation of fatty acids, 125.

Drying machine, 32.


E

Enzymes, 17.

Eschweger soap, 81.

Examination of fats and oils, 128.


F

Fahrion's method for moisture, 138.

Fats and oils, Examination of, 128.

Fats and oils used in soap manufacture, 3.

Fatty acids, 14.

Fatty acids, Distillation of, 125.

Ferments, Splitting fats with, 121.

Fillers for laundry soaps, 53.

Fillers for soap powders, 58.

Finishing change, 36.

Fish oils, 20.

Floating soap, 62.

Formaldehyde soap, 78.

Frames, 31.

Free alkali in soap, Determination of, 139.

Free fatty acid, Determination of, 128.

Free fatty acids, Extraction from tallow, 6.

Free fatty acid, Standard method of dilu., 174.
  Note on method, 188-189.

Full boiled soaps, 35.

Fullers' earth bleaching of tallow, 4.


G

Glycerides, 2.

Glycerine, 2.

Glycerine analysis, 150.

Glycerine change, 36.

Glycerine, Crude, 113.

Glycerine in spent lyes, Recovery of, 106.

Glycerine in soap, Determination of, 149.

Glycerine, Sampling crude, 162.

Glycerine soaps, 83.

Glycerol content, Ways of calculating actual, 159.

Glycerol determination, Acetin process, 155.

Glycerol determination, Bichromate process for, 160.

Graining soap, 30.

Grease, 21.

Grease, Bleaching, 21.

Grinding soap, 34.


H

Hand Paste, 93.

Hard water, 29.

Hardened oils in toilet soap, Use of, 96.

Hydrocarbon oils, 2.

Hydrogenating oils, 19.

Hydrolysis of fats and oils, 17.

Hydrolytic dissociation of soap, 1.

Hydrometers, 25.


I

Indicators, Action, 135-6.

Insoluble impurities in fatty oils, Determination of (standard method), 172.
  Note on method, 187.

Insoluble matter in soap, determination of, 143.

International committee on glycerine analysis, 150.

Iodine manufacturing oil, 191.

Iodine member Wijs method, Standard, 177-181.
  Note on method, 191.

Iodine soap, 78.


J

Joslin, ref., 113.


K

"Killing" change, 36.

Koettstorfer number (Standard method), 181-182.

Kontakt reagent, 117.

Krebitz Process, 123.

Krutolin, 96.


L

Leiste & Stiepel method for rosin in soap, 146.

Liebermann, Storch reaction, 144.

Light powders, 60.

Laundry soap, 48.

LeBlanc Process, 28.

Lewkowitsch, ref., 17, 146.

Lime saponification, 118.

Lime, Use in Krebitz Process, 123.

Lime, Use in treatment of glycerine water, 116.

Liquid medicinal soaps, 79.

Liquid soaps, 94.

Lyes, Spent, 37.


M

Magnesia, Use in  autoclave saponification, 120.

Manganese sulfate, Use of as catalyzer in fermentative cleavage of fats, 122.

Marine soaps, 39.

Medicinal soaps, 76.

Medicinal soaps, Less important, 78.

Medicinal soaps, Therapeutic value of, 76.

Melting point of fat or oil, Standard method, 193.

Mercury soaps, 78.

Metallic soaps, 1.

Methyl orange, indicator, 136.

Meyerheim, ref., 21.

Mill soap, 32.

Moisture in soap, Determination of, 138, 130.

Moisture and volatile matter in fats and oils, Standard method for
  detm. of, 170.
    Note on method, 184-185.

Mottle in soap, 81.

Mug shaving soap, 90.


N

Naphtha, Incorporation in soap, 49.

Naphthenic acids, 24.

Nigre, 36.

Normal acids, Equivalent in alkalis, 136.


O

Oils and fats, 1.

Oils and fats, Chemical constants, 18.

Oils and fats, Distinction, 1.

Oils and fats, Preserving, 18.

Oils and fat, Nature of used in soap manufacture, 2.

Oils and fats, Rancidity of, 16.

Oil hardening, 19.

Oleic acid, 15, 19.

Olein, 2, 19.

Olive oil, 14.

Olive oil foots, 14.

Organoleptic methods, 127.


P

Palmatin, 2.

Palm kernel oil, 8.

Palmitic acid, 2.

Palm oil, 8.

Palm oil, air bleaching, 12.

Palm oil, Chrome bleaching of, 9.

Palm oil soap, 66.

Pearl ash, 29.

Perfuming and coloring toilet soaps, 73.

Peroxide soap, 78.

Petroff reagent, 117.

Pfeilring reagent, 117.

Phenol, 77.

Phenolphthalein, indicator, 38.

Phenolphthalein, Using as indicator, 51.

Phenols, Soaps containing, 77.

Pinic acid, 22.

Plodder, 33.

Potash from wood ash, 27.

Potassium carbonate, 29.

Powders, Light, 60.

Powders, Scouring, 61.

Powders, Shaving, 90.

Powders, Soap, 56.

Precipitation test for treated spent lyes, 110.

Prevention of rancidity, 18.

Pumice or sand soaps, 93.

Purple shade in soap, 75.


R

Rancidity of oils and fats, 16.

Rancidity, Prevention, 18.

Recovery of glycerine from spent lye, 106.

Red oil, 15.

Red oil, Saponified, 15.

Resin acids, Total fatty and, Determination of in soap, 144.

Ribot, ref., 20.

Rosin, 22.

Rosin, Determination of in soap, 144.

Rosin saponification, 23.

Run and glued up soaps, 69.

Run soaps, 39.


S

Sal soda, 29.

Salt, 30.

Salting out, 30.

Salt "pickle," 37.

Sampling crude glycerine, 162.

Sampling for standard method, 166.
  Note on, 184.

Sampling oils and fats, 128.

Sampling soap, 137.

Saponification by ferments, 121.

Saponification, Acid, 120.

Saponification, Aqueous, 121.

Saponification, Autoclave, 118.

Saponification, Carbonate, 45.

Saponification defined, 2, 105.

Saponification, Lime, 118.

Saponification number, 181-182.

Saponification, Rosin, 23.

Saponification, Various methods, 105.

Scouring and fulling soaps for wool, 98.

Scouring powders, 61.

Scouring soap, 61.

Semi-boiled laundry soaps, 49.

Semi-boiled process, 44.

Shaving cream, 90.

Shaving powder, 90.

Shaving soaps, 87.

Silica and silicates, Determination of in soap, 148.

Silk dyeing, 102.

Silk industry, Soaps used in, 101.

Slabber, 32.

Smith method for moisture in soap, 138.

Soap analysis, 137.

Soap, Automobile, 41.

Soap, Carbolic, 71.

Soap, Castile, 79.

Soap, Chip, 54.

Soap Chip, cold made, 55.

Soap, Chip, unfilled, 56.

Soap, Cold cream, 78.

Soap, Coloring, 75.

Soap containing phenols, 77.

Soap, Curd, 71.

Soap, Defined, 1.

Soap, Determination insoluble matter, 143.

Soap, Determining glycerine in, 149.

Soap, Eschweger, 81.

Soap, Floating, 62.

Soap, Formaldehyde, 78.

Soap for wool, Scouring and fulling, 98.

Soap, Full boiled, 35.

Soap, Iodine, 78.

Soap kettle, 31.

Soap, Laundry, 48.

Soap, Liquid, 94.

Soap lye crude glycerine, 113.

Soap, Marine, 39.

Soap, Medicinal, 76.

Soap, Medicinal, less important, 78.

Soap, Mercury, 78.

Soap, Metallic, 1.

Soap, Peroxide, 78.

Soap powders, 56.

Soap, Pumice or sand, 93.

Soap, Rosin settled, 50.

Soap, Run and glued up, 69.

Soap, Scouring, 61.

Soap, Semi-boiled laundry, 49.

Soap, Shaving, 87.

Soap, Sulphur, 77.

Soap, Tannin, 78.

Soap, Tar, 77.

Soap, Test for color of, 133.

Soap, Textile, 98.

Soap, Toilet, 65.

Soap, Toilet cheaper, 68.

Soap, Toilet, cold made, 72.

Soap, Toilet perfuming and coloring, 73.

Soap, Transparent, 82.

Soap, Transparent, cold made, 84.

Soap used for cotton goods, 103.

Soap used in the silk industry, 101.

Soap, Witch hazel, 78.

Soap, Wool thrower's, 100.

Soap, Worsted finishing, 101.

Soda ash, 28.

Sodium carbonate, 28.

Sodium perborate, Use of in soap powders, 57.

Soft soaps, 40.

Soluble mineral matter detm. of in fats and oils, 173.
  Note on method, 187-188.

Solvay process, 28.

Soya bean oil, 14.

Spent lye, Recovery of glycerine from, 106.

Spent lyes, 37.

Spent lyes, Treatment of for glycerine recovery, 107.

Splitting fats with ferments, 121.

Standard methods of analysis for fats and oils, 165-196.

Starch and gelatine, Determination in soap, 143.

Stearic acid, 15, 19.

Stearin, 2, 19.

Strengthening change, 36.

Strengthening lyes, 38.

Strunz crutcher, 63.

Sugar in soap, Determination of, 150.

Sugar, Use in transparent soap, 83.

Sulfate of alumina, Use of in spent lyes, 108.

Sulphonated oils, 104.

Sulphur soaps, 77.

Sweating of soap, 62.

Sweet water, 119.

Sylvic acid, 22.


T

Talgol, 96.

Tallow, 4.

Tallow, Fullers' earth bleaching of, 4.

Tallow, Improving color by extraction of free fatty acid, 6.

Tannin soap, 78.

Tar soap, 77.

Test for color of soap, 133.

Testing of alkalis used in soap making, 134.

Textile soaps, 98.

Titer, 130.

Tank cars, Sampling, 166.

Tierces, Sampling, 168.

Titer, Standard method, 175.

Titer, Note on, 189.

Tung oil, Note one iodine, number of, 180.

Toilet soap, 65.

Toilet soaps, Cheaper, 68.

Toilet soap, Use of hardened oils in, 96.

Total alkali, Determination of in soap, 147.

Total fatty and resin acids, Determination of in soap, 144.

Train oils, 20.

Transparent soap, 82.

Transparent soap, Cold made, 84.

Troweling soap, 52.

Tsujimoto, ref., 20.

Tubes for transparent soap, 85.

Turkey red oil, 104.

Twaddle scale, 25.

Twitchell method for rosin, 145.

Twitchell process, 113.

Twitchell process, Advantages, 113.


U

Unsaponifiable matter, Determination of in oils and fats, 132.

Unsaponifiable matter, Determination of in soap, 148.

Unsaponifiable matter, determination of by standard method, 176.


V

Vacuum Oven, Standard, 176.

Vegetable oils, 6.


W

Water, 29.

Water, Hard, 29.

Witch hazel soap, 78.

Wool thrower's soap, 100.

Worsted finishing soaps, 101.


Z

Zinc oxide, Use of in autoclave saponification, 120.

Zinc oxide, Use of in soap, 33.




LITERATURE OF THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES


On our shelves is the most complete stock of technical, industrial,
engineering and scientific books in the United States. The technical
literature of every trade is well represented, as is also the literature
relating to the various sciences, both the books useful for reference as
well as those fitted for students' use as textbooks.

A large number of these we publish and for an ever increasing number we
are the sole agents.

ALL INQUIRIES MADE OF US ARE CHEERFULLY AND CAREFULLY ANSWERED AND
COMPLETE CATALOGS AS WELL AS SPECIAL LISTS SENT FREE ON REQUEST

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

_Publishers and Booksellers_

8 WARREN STREET NEW YORK


The Soap-Maker's Book Shelf

A list of standard books relating to soapmaking and allied industries.

Published and For Sale by

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

_Publishers and Booksellers_

8 WARREN STREET          NEW YORK


~Askinson, George W.~ Perfumes and Cosmetics. Their preparation and
manufacture. Fourth Edition, translated from the German, and revised
with additions by W. L. Dudley. 32 illustrations. 6-1/4 × 9-1/2. Cloth.
354 pp. New York, 1915. ~$5.00~

~Chalmers, T. W.~ The Production and Treatment of Vegetable Oils.
Including chapters on the refining of oils, the hydrogenation of oils,
the generation of hydrogen, soap making, the recovery and refining of
glycerine, and the splitting of oils. 95 illustrations, 9 folding
plates. 8 × 11-1/2. Cloth. 163 pp. London, 1919. ~$7.50~

~Deite, C.~ Manual of Toilet Soap-Making. Comprising toilet soaps,
medicated soaps, and other specialties. Second Revised Edition. 85
illustrations. 6-1/2 × 10. Cloth. 356 pp. London, 1920. ~$7.50~

~Ellis, Carleton G.~ The Hydrogenation of Oils, Catalyzers and Catalysis
and the Generation of Hydrogen and Oxygen. Second Edition, thoroughly
revised and enlarged. 240 illustrations. 6-1/4 × 9-1/2. Cloth. 767 pp.
N. Y., 1919. ~$7.50~

~Fischer, M. H.~ Soaps and Proteins, Their Colloid Chemistry in Theory and
Practice. With the collaboration of G. D. McLaughlin and M. O. Hooker.
114 illustrations. 6 × 9-1/4. Cloth. 281 pp. New York, 1921. ~$4.00~

~Holde, D.~ The Examination of Hydrocarbon Oils, and of the Saponifiable
Fats and Waxes. Translated from the Fourth German Edition by Edward
Mueller. 115 illustrations. 6-1/4 × 9-1/4. Cloth. 499 pp. N. Y., 1915.
~Net, $5.00~

~Hurst, G. H~. Soaps. A practical manual of the manufacture of domestic,
toilet and other soaps. Second Edition. 66 illustrations. 6 × 8-3/4.
Cloth. 385 pp. London, 1907. ~$6.00~

~Hurst, George H., and Simmons, W. H.~ Textile Soaps and Oils. A handbook
on the preparation, properties, and analysis of the soaps and oils and
in textile manufacturing, dyeing and printing. Third Edition, revised.
12 illustrations. 5-1/2 × 8-3/4. Cloth. 212 pp. London, 1921. ~$4.00~

~Koller, T. Cosmetics.~ A handbook of the manufacture, employment, and
testing of all cosmetic materials and cosmetic specialties, with
numerous recipes. Translated from the German. Third Edition. 5 × 7-1/2.
Cloth. 264 pp. London, 1920. ~$3.50~

~Koppe, S. W. Glycerine.~ Its introduction, Uses and Examination. For
chemists, perfumers, soapmakers, pharmacists, and explosives
technologists. 7 illustrations. 5-1/4 × 7-1/2. Cloth. 260 pp. New York,
1915. ~$3.50~

~Lamborn, L. L.~ Modern Soaps, Candles, and Glycerin. A practical manual
of modern methods of utilization of fats and oils in the manufacture of
soaps and candles, and the recovery of glycerin. 228 illustrations.
6-1/2 × 9-1/4. Cloth. 708 pp. N. Y., 1906. ~$10.00~

~Murray, B. L.~ Standards and Tests for Reagent Chemicals. 6 × 9. Cloth.
400 pp. New York, 1920. ~$3.00~

~Parry, Ernest J.~ The Chemistry of Essential Oils and Artificial
Perfumes. Vol. I, Monographs on Essential Oils. Fourth Edition, revised
and enlarged. 51 illustrations. 6-1/4 × 10. Cloth. 557 pp. London, 1921.
~$9.00~

Vol. II. Constituents of Essential Oils, Synthetic Perfumes and Isolated
Aromatics, and the Analysis of Essential Oils. Third Edition, revised
and enlarged. Illustrated. 351 pp. London, 1919. ~$7.00~

~Partington, J. R.~ The Alkali Industry. 63 illustrations. 5-1/2 × 8-1/2.
Cloth. 318 pp. London, 1918. ~$3.00~

~Rogers, Allen.~ Industrial Chemistry. A manual for the student and
manufacturer. Third Edition, thoroughly revised and enlarged. 377
illustrations. 6-1/2 × 9-3/4. Flexible fabrikoid. 1255 pp. New York,
1920. ~$7.50~

~Scott, Wilfred W.~ (Editor). Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis. A
manual of analytical methods and general reference for the analytical
chemist and for the advanced student. Second Edition, revised, with
additional tables. 142 illustrations, 3 color plates. 7 × 9-1/4. Cloth.
900 pp. N. Y., 1917. ~$7.50~

~Simmons, W. H.~ Fats, Waxes and Essential Oils. ~In Press.~

~Simmons, William H.~ Soap. Its composition, manufacture and properties.
11 illustrations. 4-3/4 × 7-1/4. Cloth. 133 pp. London, 1916. ~$1.00~

~Simmons, W. H., and Appleton, H. A.~ The Handbook of Soap Manufacture. 27
illustrations. 6 × 9. Cloth. 166 pp. London, 1908. ~$4.00~

~Van Nostrand's Chemical Annual.~ Edited by John C. Olsen. A handbook of
useful data for analytical manufacturing and investigating chemists and
chemical students. Fourth Issue, enlarged. 5 × 7-1/2. Flexible
fabrikoid. 785 pp. New York, 1918. ~$3.00~

~Watt, A.~ Art of Soapmaking. A practical handbook of the manufacture of
hard and soft soaps, toilet soaps, etc. Seventh Edition, revised and
enlarged. 43 illustrations. 5-1/4 × 7-1/2. Cloth. 323 pp. London, 1918.
~$4.00~

~Wright, C. R. A.~ Animal and Vegetable Fixed Oils, Fats, Butters, and
Waxes: Their Preparation and Properties, and the Manufacture Therefrom
of Candles, Soaps, and Other Products. Third Edition, revised and
greatly enlarged by C. Ainsworth Mitchell. 185 illustrations, 3 plates.
6 × 9. Cloth. 953 pp. London, 1921. ~$16.50~






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Soap-Making Manual, by E. G. Thomssen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOAP-MAKING MANUAL ***

***** This file should be named 34114-8.txt or 34114-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/1/1/34114/

Produced by David Clarke, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's White Nights and Other Stories, by Fyodor Dostoevsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: White Nights and Other Stories
       The Novels of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Volume X

Author: Fyodor Dostoevsky

Translator: Constance Garnett

Release Date: May 5, 2011 [EBook #36034]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITE NIGHTS AND OTHER STORIES ***




Produced by Jan-Fabian Humann, Carol Ann Brown, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





  WHITE NIGHTS
  AND OTHER STORIES

  THE NOVELS OF
  FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY
  VOLUME X




  WHITE NIGHTS

  AND OTHER STORIES BY
  FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY

  FROM THE RUSSIAN BY
  CONSTANCE GARNETT


  NEW YORK
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  1918


  _Printed in Great Britain_




         CONTENTS


                                            PAGE

  WHITE NIGHTS                                1

  NOTES FROM UNDERGROUND--
    PART I. UNDERGROUND                      50
    PART II. À PROPOS OF THE WET SNOW        81

  A FAINT HEART                             156

  A CHRISTMAS TREE AND A WEDDING            200

  POLZUNKOV                                 208

  A LITTLE HERO                             223

  MR. PROHARTCHIN                           258




WHITE NIGHTS

A SENTIMENTAL STORY FROM THE DIARY OF A DREAMER


FIRST NIGHT

It was a wonderful night, such a night as is only possible when we are
young, dear reader. The sky was so starry, so bright that, looking at
it, one could not help asking oneself whether ill-humoured and
capricious people could live under such a sky. That is a youthful
question too, dear reader, very youthful, but may the Lord put it more
frequently into your heart!... Speaking of capricious and ill-humoured
people, I cannot help recalling my moral condition all that day. From
early morning I had been oppressed by a strange despondency. It suddenly
seemed to me that I was lonely, that every one was forsaking me and
going away from me. Of course, any one is entitled to ask who "every
one" was. For though I had been living almost eight years in Petersburg
I had hardly an acquaintance. But what did I want with acquaintances? I
was acquainted with all Petersburg as it was; that was why I felt as
though they were all deserting me when all Petersburg packed up and went
to its summer villa. I felt afraid of being left alone, and for three
whole days I wandered about the town in profound dejection, not knowing
what to do with myself. Whether I walked in the Nevsky, went to the
Gardens or sauntered on the embankment, there was not one face of those
I had been accustomed to meet at the same time and place all the year.
They, of course, do not know me, but I know them. I know them
intimately, I have almost made a study of their faces, and am delighted
when they are gay, and downcast when they are under a cloud. I have
almost struck up a friendship with one old man whom I meet every blessed
day, at the same hour in Fontanka. Such a grave, pensive countenance; he
is always whispering to himself and brandishing his left arm, while in
his right hand he holds a long gnarled stick with a gold knob. He even
notices me and takes a warm interest in me. If I happen not to be at a
certain time in the same spot in Fontanka, I am certain he feels
disappointed. That is how it is that we almost bow to each other,
especially when we are both in good humour. The other day, when we had
not seen each other for two days and met on the third, we were actually
touching our hats, but, realizing in time, dropped our hands and passed
each other with a look of interest.

I know the houses too. As I walk along they seem to run forward in the
streets to look out at me from every window, and almost to say:
"Good-morning! How do you do? I am quite well, thank God, and I am to
have a new storey in May," or, "How are you? I am being redecorated
to-morrow;" or, "I was almost burnt down and had such a fright," and so
on. I have my favourites among them, some are dear friends; one of them
intends to be treated by the architect this summer. I shall go every day
on purpose to see that the operation is not a failure. God forbid! But I
shall never forget an incident with a very pretty little house of a
light pink colour. It was such a charming little brick house, it looked
so hospitably at me, and so proudly at its ungainly neighbours, that my
heart rejoiced whenever I happened to pass it. Suddenly last week I
walked along the street, and when I looked at my friend I heard a
plaintive, "They are painting me yellow!" The villains! The barbarians!
They had spared nothing, neither columns, nor cornices, and my poor
little friend was as yellow as a canary. It almost made me bilious. And
to this day I have not had the courage to visit my poor disfigured
friend, painted the colour of the Celestial Empire.

So now you understand, reader, in what sense I am acquainted with all
Petersburg.

I have mentioned already that I had felt worried for three whole days
before I guessed the cause of my uneasiness. And I felt ill at ease in
the street--this one had gone and that one had gone, and what had become
of the other?--and at home I did not feel like myself either. For two
evenings I was puzzling my brains to think what was amiss in my corner;
why I felt so uncomfortable in it. And in perplexity I scanned my grimy
green walls, my ceiling covered with a spider's web, the growth of which
Matrona has so successfully encouraged. I looked over all my furniture,
examined every chair, wondering whether the trouble lay there (for if
one chair is not standing in the same position as it stood the day
before, I am not myself). I looked at the window, but it was all in vain
... I was not a bit the better for it! I even bethought me to send for
Matrona, and was giving her some fatherly admonitions in regard to the
spider's web and sluttishness in general; but she simply stared at me in
amazement and went away without saying a word, so that the spider's web
is comfortably hanging in its place to this day. I only at last this
morning realized what was wrong. Aie! Why, they are giving me the slip
and making off to their summer villas! Forgive the triviality of the
expression, but I am in no mood for fine language ... for everything
that had been in Petersburg had gone or was going away for the holidays;
for every respectable gentleman of dignified appearance who took a cab
was at once transformed, in my eyes, into a respectable head of a
household who after his daily duties were over, was making his way to
the bosom of his family, to the summer villa; for all the passers-by had
now quite a peculiar air which seemed to say to every one they met: "We
are only here for the moment, gentlemen, and in another two hours we
shall be going off to the summer villa." If a window opened after
delicate fingers, white as snow, had tapped upon the pane, and the head
of a pretty girl was thrust out, calling to a street-seller with pots of
flowers--at once on the spot I fancied that those flowers were being
bought not simply in order to enjoy the flowers and the spring in stuffy
town lodgings, but because they would all be very soon moving into the
country and could take the flowers with them. What is more, I made such
progress in my new peculiar sort of investigation that I could
distinguish correctly from the mere air of each in what summer villa he
was living. The inhabitants of Kamenny and Aptekarsky Islands or of the
Peterhof Road were marked by the studied elegance of their manner, their
fashionable summer suits, and the fine carriages in which they drove to
town. Visitors to Pargolovo and places further away impressed one at
first sight by their reasonable and dignified air; the tripper to
Krestovsky Island could be recognized by his look of irrepressible
gaiety. If I chanced to meet a long procession of waggoners walking
lazily with the reins in their hands beside waggons loaded with regular
mountains of furniture, tables, chairs, ottomans and sofas and domestic
utensils of all sorts, frequently with a decrepit cook sitting on the
top of it all, guarding her master's property as though it were the
apple of her eye; or if I saw boats heavily loaded with household goods
crawling along the Neva or Fontanka to the Black River or the
Islands--the waggons and the boats were multiplied tenfold, a
hundredfold, in my eyes. I fancied that everything was astir and moving,
everything was going in regular caravans to the summer villas. It seemed
as though Petersburg threatened to become a wilderness, so that at last
I felt ashamed, mortified and sad that I had nowhere to go for the
holidays and no reason to go away. I was ready to go away with every
waggon, to drive off with every gentleman of respectable appearance who
took a cab; but no one--absolutely no one--invited me; it seemed they
had forgotten me, as though really I were a stranger to them!

I took long walks, succeeding, as I usually did, in quite forgetting
where I was, when I suddenly found myself at the city gates. Instantly I
felt lighthearted, and I passed the barrier and walked between
cultivated fields and meadows, unconscious of fatigue, and feeling only
all over as though a burden were falling off my soul. All the passers-by
gave me such friendly looks that they seemed almost greeting me, they
all seemed so pleased at something. They were all smoking cigars, every
one of them. And I felt pleased as I never had before. It was as though
I had suddenly found myself in Italy--so strong was the effect of nature
upon a half-sick townsman like me, almost stifling between city walls.

There is something inexpressibly touching in nature round Petersburg,
when at the approach of spring she puts forth all her might, all the
powers bestowed on her by Heaven, when she breaks into leaf, decks
herself out and spangles herself with flowers.... Somehow I cannot help
being reminded of a frail, consumptive girl, at whom one sometimes looks
with compassion, sometimes with sympathetic love, whom sometimes one
simply does not notice; though suddenly in one instant she becomes, as
though by chance, inexplicably lovely and exquisite, and, impressed and
intoxicated, one cannot help asking oneself what power made those sad,
pensive eyes flash with such fire? What summoned the blood to those
pale, wan cheeks? What bathed with passion those soft features? What set
that bosom heaving? What so suddenly called strength, life and beauty
into the poor girl's face, making it gleam with such a smile, kindle
with such bright, sparkling laughter? You look round, you seek for some
one, you conjecture.... But the moment passes, and next day you meet,
maybe, the same pensive and preoccupied look as before, the same pale
face, the same meek and timid movements, and even signs of remorse,
traces of a mortal anguish and regret for the fleeting distraction....
And you grieve that the momentary beauty has faded so soon never to
return, that it flashed upon you so treacherously, so vainly, grieve
because you had not even time to love her....

And yet my night was better than my day! This was how it happened.

I came back to the town very late, and it had struck ten as I was going
towards my lodgings. My way lay along the canal embankment, where at
that hour you never meet a soul. It is true that I live in a very remote
part of the town. I walked along singing, for when I am happy I am
always humming to myself like every happy man who has no friend or
acquaintance with whom to share his joy. Suddenly I had a most
unexpected adventure.

Leaning on the canal railing stood a woman with her elbows on the rail,
she was apparently looking with great attention at the muddy water of
the canal. She was wearing a very charming yellow hat and a jaunty
little black mantle. "She's a girl, and I am sure she is dark," I
thought. She did not seem to hear my footsteps, and did not even stir
when I passed by with bated breath and loudly throbbing heart.

"Strange," I thought; "she must be deeply absorbed in something," and
all at once I stopped as though petrified. I heard a muffled sob. Yes! I
was not mistaken, the girl was crying, and a minute later I heard sob
after sob. Good Heavens! My heart sank. And timid as I was with women,
yet this was such a moment!... I turned, took a step towards her, and
should certainly have pronounced the word "Madam!" if I had not known
that that exclamation has been uttered a thousand times in every Russian
society novel. It was only that reflection stopped me. But while I was
seeking for a word, the girl came to herself, looked round, started,
cast down her eyes and slipped by me along the embankment. I at once
followed her; but she, divining this, left the embankment, crossed the
road and walked along the pavement. I dared not cross the street after
her. My heart was fluttering like a captured bird. All at once a chance
came to my aid.

Along the same side of the pavement there suddenly came into sight, not
far from the girl, a gentleman in evening dress, of dignified years,
though by no means of dignified carriage; he was staggering and
cautiously leaning against the wall. The girl flew straight as an arrow,
with the timid haste one sees in all girls who do not want any one to
volunteer to accompany them home at night, and no doubt the staggering
gentleman would not have pursued her, if my good luck had not prompted
him.

Suddenly, without a word to any one, the gentleman set off and flew full
speed in pursuit of my unknown lady. She was racing like the wind, but
the staggering gentleman was overtaking--overtook her. The girl uttered
a shriek, and ... I bless my luck for the excellent knotted stick, which
happened on that occasion to be in my right hand. In a flash I was on
the other side of the street; in a flash the obtrusive gentleman had
taken in the position, had grasped the irresistible argument, fallen
back without a word, and only when we were very far away protested
against my action in rather vigorous language. But his words hardly
reached us.

"Give me your arm," I said to the girl. "And he won't dare to annoy us
further."

She took my arm without a word, still trembling with excitement and
terror. Oh, obtrusive gentleman! How I blessed you at that moment! I
stole a glance at her, she was very charming and dark--I had guessed
right.

On her black eyelashes there still glistened a tear--from her recent
terror or her former grief--I don't know. But there was already a gleam
of a smile on her lips. She too stole a glance at me, faintly blushed
and looked down.

"There, you see; why did you drive me away? If I had been here, nothing
would have happened...."

"But I did not know you; I thought that you too...."

"Why, do you know me now?"

"A little! Here, for instance, why are you trembling?"

"Oh, you are right at the first guess!" I answered, delighted that my
girl had intelligence; that is never out of place in company with
beauty. "Yes, from the first glance you have guessed the sort of man you
have to do with. Precisely; I am shy with women, I am agitated, I don't
deny it, as much so as you were a minute ago when that gentleman alarmed
you. I am in some alarm now. It's like a dream, and I never guessed even
in my sleep that I should ever talk with any woman."

"What? Really?..."

"Yes; if my arm trembles, it is because it has never been held by a
pretty little hand like yours. I am a complete stranger to women; that
is, I have never been used to them. You see, I am alone.... I don't even
know how to talk to them. Here, I don't know now whether I have not said
something silly to you! Tell me frankly; I assure you beforehand that I
am not quick to take offence?..."

"No, nothing, nothing, quite the contrary. And if you insist on my
speaking frankly, I will tell you that women like such timidity; and if
you want to know more, I like it too, and I won't drive you away till I
get home."

"You will make me," I said, breathless with delight, "lose my timidity,
and then farewell to all my chances...."

"Chances! What chances--of what? That's not so nice."

"I beg your pardon, I am sorry, it was a slip of the tongue; but how can
you expect one at such a moment to have no desire...."

"To be liked, eh?"

"Well, yes; but do, for goodness' sake, be kind. Think what I am! Here,
I am twenty-six and I have never seen any one. How can I speak well,
tactfully, and to the point? It will seem better to you when I have told
you everything openly.... I don't know how to be silent when my heart is
speaking. Well, never mind.... Believe me, not one woman, never, never!
No acquaintance of any sort! And I do nothing but dream every day that
at last I shall meet some one. Oh, if only you knew how often I have
been in love in that way...."

"How? With whom?..."

"Why, with no one, with an ideal, with the one I dream of in my sleep. I
make up regular romances in my dreams. Ah, you don't know me! It's true,
of course, I have met two or three women, but what sort of women were
they? They were all landladies, that.... But I shall make you laugh if I
tell you that I have several times thought of speaking, just simply
speaking, to some aristocratic lady in the street, when she is alone, I
need hardly say; speaking to her, of course, timidly, respectfully,
passionately; telling her that I am perishing in solitude, begging her
not to send me away; saying that I have no chance of making the
acquaintance of any woman; impressing upon her that it is a positive
duty for a woman not to repulse so timid a prayer from such a luckless
man as me. That, in fact, all I ask is, that she should say two or three
sisterly words with sympathy, should not repulse me at first sight;
should take me on trust and listen to what I say; should laugh at me if
she likes, encourage me, say two words to me, only two words, even
though we never meet again afterwards!... But you are laughing; however,
that is why I am telling you...."

"Don't be vexed; I am only laughing at your being your own enemy, and if
you had tried you would have succeeded, perhaps, even though it had been
in the street; the simpler the better.... No kind-hearted woman, unless
she were stupid or, still more, vexed about something at the moment,
could bring herself to send you away without those two words which you
ask for so timidly.... But what am I saying? Of course she would take
you for a madman. I was judging by myself; I know a good deal about
other people's lives."

"Oh, thank you," I cried; "you don't know what you have done for me
now!"

"I am glad! I am glad! But tell me how did you find out that I was the
sort of woman with whom ... well, whom you think worthy ... of attention
and friendship ... in fact, not a landlady as you say? What made you
decide to come up to me?"

"What made me?... But you were alone; that gentleman was too insolent;
it's night. You must admit that it was a duty...."

"No, no; I mean before, on the other side--you know you meant to come up
to me."

"On the other side? Really I don't know how to answer; I am afraid
to.... Do you know I have been happy to-day? I walked along singing; I
went out into the country; I have never had such happy moments. You ...
perhaps it was my fancy.... Forgive me for referring to it; I fancied
you were crying, and I ... could not bear to hear it ... it made my
heart ache.... Oh, my goodness! Surely I might be troubled about you?
Surely there was no harm in feeling brotherly compassion for you.... I
beg your pardon, I said compassion.... Well, in short, surely you would
not be offended at my involuntary impulse to go up to you?..."

"Stop, that's enough, don't talk of it," said the girl, looking down,
and pressing my hand. "It's my fault for having spoken of it; but I am
glad I was not mistaken in you.... But here I am home; I must go down
this turning, it's two steps from here.... Good-bye, thank you!..."

"Surely ... surely you don't mean ... that we shall never see each other
again?... Surely this is not to be the end?"

"You see," said the girl, laughing, "at first you only wanted two words,
and now.... However, I won't say anything ... perhaps we shall meet...."

"I shall come here to-morrow," I said. "Oh, forgive me, I am already
making demands...."

"Yes, you are not very patient ... you are almost insisting."

"Listen, listen!" I interrupted her. "Forgive me if I tell you something
else.... I tell you what, I can't help coming here to-morrow, I am a
dreamer; I have so little real life that I look upon such moments as
this now, as so rare, that I cannot help going over such moments again
in my dreams. I shall be dreaming of you all night, a whole week, a
whole year. I shall certainly come here to-morrow, just here to this
place, just at the same hour, and I shall be happy remembering to-day.
This place is dear to me already. I have already two or three such
places in Petersburg. I once shed tears over memories ... like you....
Who knows, perhaps you were weeping ten minutes ago over some memory....
But, forgive me, I have forgotten myself again; perhaps you have once
been particularly happy here...."

"Very good," said the girl, "perhaps I will come here to-morrow, too, at
ten o'clock. I see that I can't forbid you.... The fact is, I have to be
here; don't imagine that I am making an appointment with you; I tell you
beforehand that I have to be here on my own account. But ... well, I
tell you straight out, I don't mind if you do come. To begin with,
something unpleasant might happen as it did to-day, but never mind
that.... In short, I should simply like to see you ... to say two words
to you. Only, mind, you must not think the worse of me now! Don't think
I make appointments so lightly.... I shouldn't make it except that....
But let that be my secret! Only a compact beforehand...."

"A compact! Speak, tell me, tell me all beforehand; I agree to anything,
I am ready for anything," I cried delighted. "I answer for myself, I
will be obedient, respectful ... you know me...."

"It's just because I do know you that I ask you to come to-morrow," said
the girl, laughing. "I know you perfectly. But mind you will come on the
condition, in the first place (only be good, do what I ask--you see, I
speak frankly), you won't fall in love with me.... That's impossible, I
assure you. I am ready for friendship; here's my hand.... But you
mustn't fall in love with me, I beg you!"

"I swear," I cried, gripping her hand....

"Hush, don't swear, I know you are ready to flare up like gunpowder.
Don't think ill of me for saying so. If only you knew.... I, too, have
no one to whom I can say a word, whose advice I can ask. Of course, one
does not look for an adviser in the street; but you are an exception. I
know you as though we had been friends for twenty years.... You won't
deceive me, will you?..."

"You will see ... the only thing is, I don't know how I am going to
survive the next twenty-four hours."

"Sleep soundly. Good-night, and remember that I have trusted you
already. But you exclaimed so nicely just now, 'Surely one can't be held
responsible for every feeling, even for brotherly sympathy!' Do you
know, that was so nicely said, that the idea struck me at once, that I
might confide in you?"

"For God's sake do; but about what? What is it?"

"Wait till to-morrow. Meanwhile, let that be a secret. So much the
better for you; it will give it a faint flavour of romance. Perhaps I
will tell you to-morrow, and perhaps not.... I will talk to you a little
more beforehand; we will get to know each other better...."

"Oh yes, I will tell you all about myself to-morrow! But what has
happened? It is as though a miracle had befallen me.... My God, where am
I? Come, tell me aren't you glad that you were not angry and did not
drive me away at the first moment, as any other woman would have done?
In two minutes you have made me happy for ever. Yes, happy; who knows,
perhaps, you have reconciled me with myself, solved my doubts!...
Perhaps such moments come upon me.... But there I will tell you all
about it to-morrow, you shall know everything, everything...."

"Very well, I consent; you shall begin...."

"Agreed."

"Good-bye till to-morrow!"

"Till to-morrow!"

And we parted. I walked about all night; I could not make up my mind to
go home. I was so happy.... To-morrow!


SECOND NIGHT

"Well, so you have survived!" she said, pressing both my hands.

"I've been here for the last two hours; you don't know what a state I
have been in all day."

"I know, I know. But to business. Do you know why I have come? Not to
talk nonsense, as I did yesterday. I tell you what, we must behave more
sensibly in future. I thought a great deal about it last night."

"In what way--in what must we be more sensible? I am ready for my part;
but, really, nothing more sensible has happened to me in my life than
this, now."

"Really? In the first place, I beg you not to squeeze my hands so;
secondly, I must tell you that I spent a long time thinking about you
and feeling doubtful to-day."

"And how did it end?"

"How did it end? The upshot of it is that we must begin all over again,
because the conclusion I reached to-day was that I don't know you at
all; that I behaved like a baby last night, like a little girl; and, of
course, the fact of it is, that it's my soft heart that is to
blame--that is, I sang my own praises, as one always does in the end
when one analyses one's conduct. And therefore to correct my mistake,
I've made up my mind to find out all about you minutely. But as I have
no one from whom I can find out anything, you must tell me everything
fully yourself. Well, what sort of man are you? Come, make
haste--begin--tell me your whole history."

"My history!" I cried in alarm. "My history! But who has told you I have
a history? I have no history...."

"Then how have you lived, if you have no history?" she interrupted,
laughing.

"Absolutely without any history! I have lived, as they say, keeping
myself to myself, that is, utterly alone--alone, entirely alone. Do you
know what it means to be alone?"

"But how alone? Do you mean you never saw any one?"

"Oh no, I see people, of course; but still I am alone."

"Why, do you never talk to any one?"

"Strictly speaking, with no one."

"Who are you then? Explain yourself! Stay, I guess: most likely, like me
you have a grandmother. She is blind and will never let me go anywhere,
so that I have almost forgotten how to talk; and when I played some
pranks two years ago, and she saw there was no holding me in, she called
me up and pinned my dress to hers, and ever since we sit like that for
days together; she knits a stocking, though she's blind, and I sit
beside her, sew or read aloud to her--it's such a queer habit, here for
two years I've been pinned to her...."

"Good Heavens! what misery! But no, I haven't a grandmother like that."

"Well, if you haven't why do you sit at home?..."

"Listen, do you want to know the sort of man I am?"

"Yes, yes!"

"In the strict sense of the word?"

"In the very strictest sense of the word."

"Very well, I am a type!"

"Type, type! What sort of type?" cried the girl, laughing, as though she
had not had a chance of laughing for a whole year. "Yes, it's very
amusing talking to you. Look, here's a seat, let us sit down. No one is
passing here, no one will hear us, and--begin your history. For it's no
good your telling me, I know you have a history; only you are concealing
it. To begin with, what is a type?"

"A type? A type is an original, it's an absurd person!" I said, infected
by her childish laughter. "It's a character. Listen; do you know what is
meant by a dreamer?"

"A dreamer! Indeed I should think I do know. I am a dreamer myself.
Sometimes, as I sit by grandmother, all sorts of things come into my
head. Why, when one begins dreaming one lets one's fancy run away with
one--why, I marry a Chinese Prince!... Though sometimes it is a good
thing to dream! But, goodness knows! Especially when one has something
to think of apart from dreams," added the girl, this time rather
seriously.

"Excellent! If you have been married to a Chinese Emperor, you will
quite understand me. Come, listen.... But one minute, I don't know your
name yet."

"At last! You have been in no hurry to think of it!"

"Oh, my goodness! It never entered my head, I felt quite happy as it
was...."

"My name is Nastenka."

"Nastenka! And nothing else?"

"Nothing else! Why, is not that enough for you, you insatiable person?"

"Not enough? On the contrary, it's a great deal, a very great deal,
Nastenka; you kind girl, if you are Nastenka for me from the first."

"Quite so! Well?"

"Well, listen, Nastenka, now for this absurd history."

I sat down beside her, assumed a pedantically serious attitude, and
began as though reading from a manuscript:--

"There are, Nastenka, though you may not know it, strange nooks in
Petersburg. It seems as though the same sun as shines for all Petersburg
people does not peep into those spots, but some other different new one,
bespoken expressly for those nooks, and it throws a different light on
everything. In these corners, dear Nastenka, quite a different life is
lived, quite unlike the life that is surging round us, but such as
perhaps exists in some unknown realm, not among us in our serious,
over-serious, time. Well, that life is a mixture of something purely
fantastic, fervently ideal, with something (alas! Nastenka) dingily
prosaic and ordinary, not to say incredibly vulgar."

"Foo! Good Heavens! What a preface! What do I hear?"

"Listen, Nastenka. (It seems to me I shall never be tired of calling you
Nastenka.) Let me tell you that in these corners live strange
people--dreamers. The dreamer--if you want an exact definition--is not a
human being, but a creature of an intermediate sort. For the most part
he settles in some inaccessible corner, as though hiding from the light
of day; once he slips into his corner, he grows to it like a snail, or,
anyway, he is in that respect very much like that remarkable creature,
which is an animal and a house both at once, and is called a tortoise.
Why do you suppose he is so fond of his four walls, which are invariably
painted green, grimy, dismal and reeking unpardonably of tobacco smoke?
Why is it that when this absurd gentleman is visited by one of his few
acquaintances (and he ends by getting rid of all his friends), why does
this absurd person meet him with such embarrassment, changing
countenance and overcome with confusion, as though he had only just
committed some crime within his four walls; as though he had been
forging counterfeit notes, or as though he were writing verses to be
sent to a journal with an anonymous letter, in which he states that the
real poet is dead, and that his friend thinks it his sacred duty to
publish his things? Why, tell me, Nastenka, why is it conversation is
not easy between the two friends? Why is there no laughter? Why does no
lively word fly from the tongue of the perplexed newcomer, who at other
times may be very fond of laughter, lively words, conversation about the
fair sex, and other cheerful subjects? And why does this friend,
probably a new friend and on his first visit--for there will hardly be a
second, and the friend will never come again--why is the friend himself
so confused, so tongue-tied, in spite of his wit (if he has any), as he
looks at the downcast face of his host, who in his turn becomes utterly
helpless and at his wits' end after gigantic but fruitless efforts to
smooth things over and enliven the conversation, to show his knowledge
of polite society, to talk, too, of the fair sex, and by such humble
endeavour, to please the poor man, who like a fish out of water has
mistakenly come to visit him? Why does the gentleman, all at once
remembering some very necessary business which never existed, suddenly
seize his hat and hurriedly make off, snatching away his hand from the
warm grip of his host, who was trying his utmost to show his regret and
retrieve the lost position? Why does the friend chuckle as he goes out
of the door, and swear never to come and see this queer creature again,
though the queer creature is really a very good fellow, and at the same
time he cannot refuse his imagination the little diversion of comparing
the queer fellow's countenance during their conversation with the
expression of an unhappy kitten treacherously captured, roughly handled,
frightened and subjected to all sorts of indignities by children, till,
utterly crestfallen, it hides away from them under a chair in the dark,
and there must needs at its leisure bristle up, spit, and wash its
insulted face with both paws, and long afterwards look angrily at life
and nature, and even at the bits saved from the master's dinner for it
by the sympathetic housekeeper?"

"Listen," interrupted Nastenka, who had listened to me all the time in
amazement, opening her eyes and her little mouth. "Listen; I don't know
in the least why it happened and why you ask me such absurd questions;
all I know is, that this adventure must have happened word for word to
you."

"Doubtless," I answered, with the gravest face.

"Well, since there is no doubt about it, go on," said Nastenka, "because
I want very much to know how it will end."

"You want to know, Nastenka, what our hero, that is I--for the hero of
the whole business was my humble self--did in his corner? You want to
know why I lost my head and was upset for the whole day by the
unexpected visit of a friend? You want to know why I was so startled,
why I blushed when the door of my room was opened, why I was not able to
entertain my visitor, and why I was crushed under the weight of my own
hospitality?"

"Why, yes, yes," answered Nastenka, "that's the point. Listen. You
describe it all splendidly, but couldn't you perhaps describe it a
little less splendidly? You talk as though you were reading it out of a
book."

"Nastenka," I answered in a stern and dignified voice, hardly able to
keep from laughing, "dear Nastenka, I know I describe splendidly, but,
excuse me, I don't know how else to do it. At this moment, dear
Nastenka, at this moment I am like the spirit of King Solomon when,
after lying a thousand years under seven seals in his urn, those seven
seals were at last taken off. At this moment, Nastenka, when we have met
at last after such a long separation--for I have known you for ages,
Nastenka, because I have been looking for some one for ages, and that is
a sign that it was you I was looking for, and it was ordained that we
should meet now--at this moment a thousand valves have opened in my
head, and I must let myself flow in a river of words, or I shall choke.
And so I beg you not to interrupt me, Nastenka, but listen humbly and
obediently, or I will be silent."

"No, no, no! Not at all. Go on! I won't say a word!"

"I will continue. There is, my friend Nastenka, one hour in my day which
I like extremely. That is the hour when almost all business, work and
duties are over, and every one is hurrying home to dinner, to lie down,
to rest, and on the way all are cogitating on other more cheerful
subjects relating to their evenings, their nights, and all the rest of
their free time. At that hour our hero--for allow me, Nastenka, to tell
my story in the third person, for one feels awfully ashamed to tell it
in the first person--and so at that hour our hero, who had his work too,
was pacing along after the others. But a strange feeling of pleasure set
his pale, rather crumpled-looking face working. He looked not with
indifference on the evening glow which was slowly fading on the cold
Petersburg sky. When I say he looked, I am lying: he did not look at it,
but saw it as it were without realizing, as though tired or preoccupied
with some other more interesting subject, so that he could scarcely
spare a glance for anything about him. He was pleased because till next
day he was released from business irksome to him, and happy as a
schoolboy let out from the class-room to his games and mischief. Take a
look at him, Nastenka; you will see at once that joyful emotion has
already had an effect on his weak nerves and morbidly excited fancy. You
see he is thinking of something.... Of dinner, do you imagine? Of the
evening? What is he looking at like that? Is it at that gentleman of
dignified appearance who is bowing so picturesquely to the lady who
rolls by in a carriage drawn by prancing horses? No, Nastenka; what are
all those trivialities to him now! He is rich now with his _own
individual_ life; he has suddenly become rich, and it is not for
nothing that the fading sunset sheds its farewell gleams so gaily before
him, and calls forth a swarm of impressions from his warmed heart. Now
he hardly notices the road, on which the tiniest details at other times
would strike him. Now 'the Goddess of Fancy' (if you have read
Zhukovsky, dear Nastenka) has already with fantastic hand spun her
golden warp and begun weaving upon it patterns of marvellous magic
life--and who knows, maybe, her fantastic hand has borne him to the
seventh crystal heaven far from the excellent granite pavement on which
he was walking his way? Try stopping him now, ask him suddenly where he
is standing now, through what streets he is going--he will, probably
remember nothing, neither where he is going nor where he is standing
now, and flushing with vexation he will certainly tell some lie to save
appearances. That is why he starts, almost cries out, and looks round
with horror when a respectable old lady stops him politely in the middle
of the pavement and asks her way. Frowning with vexation he strides on,
scarcely noticing that more than one passer-by smiles and turns round to
look after him, and that a little girl, moving out of his way in alarm,
laughs aloud, gazing open-eyed at his broad meditative smile and
gesticulations. But fancy catches up in its playful flight the old
woman, the curious passers-by, and the laughing child, and the peasants
spending their nights in their barges on Fontanka (our hero, let us
suppose, is walking along the canal-side at that moment), and
capriciously weaves every one and everything into the canvas like a fly
in a spider's web. And it is only after the queer fellow has returned to
his comfortable den with fresh stores for his mind to work on, has sat
down and finished his dinner, that he comes to himself, when Matrona who
waits upon him--always thoughtful and depressed--clears the table and
gives him his pipe; he comes to himself then and recalls with surprise
that he has dined, though he has absolutely no notion how it has
happened. It has grown dark in the room; his soul is sad and empty; the
whole kingdom of fancies drops to pieces about him, drops to pieces
without a trace, without a sound, floats away like a dream, and he
cannot himself remember what he was dreaming. But a vague sensation
faintly stirs his heart and sets it aching, some new desire temptingly
tickles and excites his fancy, and imperceptibly evokes a swarm of fresh
phantoms. Stillness reigns in the little room; imagination is fostered
by solitude and idleness; it is faintly smouldering, faintly simmering,
like the water with which old Matrona is making her coffee as she moves
quietly about in the kitchen close by. Now it breaks out spasmodically;
and the book, picked up aimlessly and at random, drops from my dreamer's
hand before he has reached the third page. His imagination is again
stirred and at work, and again a new world, a new fascinating life opens
vistas before him. A fresh dream--fresh happiness! A fresh rush of
delicate, voluptuous poison! What is real life to him! To his corrupted
eyes we live, you and I, Nastenka, so torpidly, slowly, insipidly; in
his eyes we are all so dissatisfied with our fate, so exhausted by our
life! And, truly, see how at first sight everything is cold, morose, as
though ill-humoured among us.... Poor things! thinks our dreamer. And it
is no wonder that he thinks it! Look at these magic phantasms, which so
enchantingly, so whimsically, so carelessly and freely group before him
in such a magic, animated picture, in which the most prominent figure in
the foreground is of course himself, our dreamer, in his precious
person. See what varied adventures, what an endless swarm of ecstatic
dreams. You ask, perhaps, what he is dreaming of. Why ask that?--why, of
everything ... of the lot of the poet, first unrecognized, then crowned
with laurels; of friendship with Hoffmann, St. Bartholomew's Night, of
Diana Vernon, of playing the hero at the taking of Kazan by Ivan
Vassilyevitch, of Clara Mowbray, of Effie Deans, of the council of the
prelates and Huss before them, of the rising of the dead in 'Robert the
Devil' (do you remember the music, it smells of the churchyard!), of
Minna and Brenda, of the battle of Berezina, of the reading of a poem at
Countess V. D.'s, of Danton, of Cleopatra _ei suoi amanti_, of a
little house in Kolomna, of a little home of one's own and beside one a
dear creature who listens to one on a winter's evening, opening her
little mouth and eyes as you are listening to me now, my angel.... No,
Nastenka, what is there, what is there for him, voluptuous sluggard, in
this life, for which you and I have such a longing? He thinks that this
is a poor pitiful life, not foreseeing that for him too, maybe, sometime
the mournful hour may strike, when for one day of that pitiful life he
would give all his years of phantasy, and would give them not only for
joy and for happiness, but without caring to make distinctions in that
hour of sadness, remorse and unchecked grief. But so far that
threatening has not arrived--he desires nothing, because he is superior
to all desire, because he has everything, because he is satiated,
because he is the artist of his own life, and creates it for himself
every hour to suit his latest whim. And you know this fantastic world of
fairyland is so easily, so naturally created! As though it were not a
delusion! Indeed, he is ready to believe at some moments that all this
life is not suggested by feeling, is not mirage, not a delusion of the
imagination, but that it is concrete, real, substantial! Why is it,
Nastenka, why is it at such moments one holds one's breath? Why, by what
sorcery, through what incomprehensible caprice, is the pulse quickened,
does a tear start from the dreamer's eye, while his pale moist cheeks
glow, while his whole being is suffused with an inexpressible sense of
consolation? Why is it that whole sleepless nights pass like a flash in
inexhaustible gladness and happiness, and when the dawn gleams rosy at
the window and daybreak floods the gloomy room with uncertain, fantastic
light, as in Petersburg, our dreamer, worn out and exhausted, flings
himself on his bed and drops asleep with thrills of delight in his
morbidly overwrought spirit, and with a weary sweet ache in his heart?
Yes, Nastenka, one deceives oneself and unconsciously believes that real
true passion is stirring one's soul; one unconsciously believes that
there is something living, tangible in one's immaterial dreams! And is
it delusion? Here love, for instance, is bound up with all its
fathomless joy, all its torturing agonies in his bosom.... Only look at
him, and you will be convinced! Would you believe, looking at him, dear
Nastenka, that he has never known her whom he loves in his ecstatic
dreams? Can it be that he has only seen her in seductive visions, and
that this passion has been nothing but a dream? Surely they must have
spent years hand in hand together--alone the two of them, casting off
all the world and each uniting his or her life with the other's? Surely
when the hour of parting came she must have lain sobbing and grieving on
his bosom, heedless of the tempest raging under the sullen sky, heedless
of the wind which snatches and bears away the tears from her black
eyelashes? Can all of that have been a dream--and that garden, dejected,
forsaken, run wild, with its little moss-grown paths, solitary, gloomy,
where they used to walk so happily together, where they hoped, grieved,
loved, loved each other so long, "so long and so fondly?" And that queer
ancestral house where she spent so many years lonely and sad with her
morose old husband, always silent and splenetic, who frightened them,
while timid as children they hid their love from each other? What
torments they suffered, what agonies of terror, how innocent, how pure
was their love, and how (I need hardly say, Nastenka) malicious people
were! And, good Heavens! surely he met her afterwards, far from their
native shores, under alien skies, in the hot south in the divinely
eternal city, in the dazzling splendour of the ball to the crash of
music, in a _palazzo_ (it must be in a _palazzo_), drowned in
a sea of lights, on the balcony, wreathed in myrtle and roses, where,
recognizing him, she hurriedly removes her mask and whispering, 'I am
free,' flings herself trembling into his arms, and with a cry of
rapture, clinging to one another, in one instant they forget their
sorrow and their parting and all their agonies, and the gloomy house and
the old man and the dismal garden in that distant land, and the seat on
which with a last passionate kiss she tore herself away from his arms
numb with anguish and despair.... Oh, Nastenka, you must admit that one
would start, betray confusion, and blush like a schoolboy who has just
stuffed in his pocket an apple stolen from a neighbour's garden, when
your uninvited visitor, some stalwart, lanky fellow, a festive soul fond
of a joke, opens your door and shouts out as though nothing were
happening: 'My dear boy, I have this minute come from Pavlovsk.' My
goodness! the old count is dead, unutterable happiness is close at
hand--and people arrive from Pavlovsk!"

Finishing my pathetic appeal, I paused pathetically. I remembered that I
had an intense desire to force myself to laugh, for I was already
feeling that a malignant demon was stirring within me, that there was a
lump in my throat, that my chin was beginning to twitch, and that my
eyes were growing more and more moist.

I expected Nastenka, who listened to me opening her clever eyes, would
break into her childish, irrepressible laugh; and I was already
regretting that I had gone so far, that I had unnecessarily described
what had long been simmering in my heart, about which I could speak as
though from a written account of it, because I had long ago passed
judgment on myself and now could not resist reading it, making my
confession, without expecting to be understood; but to my surprise she
was silent, waiting a little, then she faintly pressed my hand and with
timid sympathy asked--

"Surely you haven't lived like that all your life?"

"All my life, Nastenka," I answered; "all my life, and it seems to me I
shall go on so to the end."

"No, that won't do," she said uneasily, "that must not be; and so,
maybe, I shall spend all my life beside grandmother. Do you know, it is
not at all good to live like that?"

"I know, Nastenka, I know!" I cried, unable to restrain my feelings
longer. "And I realize now, more than ever, that I have lost all my best
years! And now I know it and feel it more painfully from recognizing
that God has sent me you, my good angel, to tell me that and show it.
Now that I sit beside you and talk to you it is strange for me to think
of the future, for in the future--there is loneliness again, again this
musty, useless life; and what shall I have to dream of when I have been
so happy in reality beside you! Oh, may you be blessed, dear girl, for
not having repulsed me at first, for enabling me to say that for two
evenings, at least, I have lived."

"Oh, no, no!" cried Nastenka and tears glistened in her eyes. "No, it
mustn't be so any more; we must not part like that! what are two
evenings?"

"Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! Do you know how far you have reconciled me to
myself? Do you know now that I shall not think so ill of myself, as I
have at some moments? Do you know that, maybe, I shall leave off
grieving over the crime and sin of my life? for such a life is a crime
and a sin. And do not imagine that I have been exaggerating
anything--for goodness' sake don't think that, Nastenka: for at times
such misery comes over me, such misery.... Because it begins to seem to
me at such times that I am incapable of beginning a life in real life,
because it has seemed to me that I have lost all touch, all instinct for
the actual, the real; because at last I have cursed myself; because
after my fantastic nights I have moments of returning sobriety, which
are awful! Meanwhile, you hear the whirl and roar of the crowd in the
vortex of life around you; you hear, you see, men living in reality; you
see that life for them is not forbidden, that their life does not float
away like a dream, like a vision; that their life is being eternally
renewed, eternally youthful, and not one hour of it is the same as
another; while fancy is so spiritless, monotonous to vulgarity and
easily scared, the slave of shadows, of the idea, the slave of the first
cloud that shrouds the sun, and overcasts with depression the true
Petersburg heart so devoted to the sun--and what is fancy in depression!
One feels that this _inexhaustible_ fancy is weary at last and worn
out with continual exercise, because one is growing into manhood,
outgrowing one's old ideals: they are being shattered into fragments,
into dust; if there is no other life one must build one up from the
fragments. And meanwhile the soul longs and craves for something else!
And in vain the dreamer rakes over his old dreams, as though seeking a
spark among the embers, to fan them into flame, to warm his chilled
heart by the rekindled fire, and to rouse up in it again all that was so
sweet, that touched his heart, that set his blood boiling, drew tears
from his eyes, and so luxuriously deceived him! Do you know, Nastenka,
the point I have reached? Do you know that I am forced now to celebrate
the anniversary of my own sensations, the anniversary of that which was
once so sweet, which never existed in reality--for this anniversary is
kept in memory of those same foolish, shadowy dreams--and to do this
because those foolish dreams are no more, because I have nothing to earn
them with; you know even dreams do not come for nothing! Do you know
that I love now to recall and visit at certain dates the places where I
was once happy in my own way? I love to build up my present in harmony
with the irrevocable past, and I often wander like a shadow, aimless,
sad and dejected, about the streets and crooked lanes of Petersburg.
What memories they are! To remember, for instance, that here just a year
ago, just at this time, at this hour, on this pavement, I wandered just
as lonely, just as dejected as to-day. And one remembers that then one's
dreams were sad, and though the past was no better one feels as though
it had somehow been better, and that life was more peaceful, that one
was free from the black thoughts that haunt one now; that one was free
from the gnawing of conscience--the gloomy, sullen gnawing which now
gives me no rest by day or by night. And one asks oneself where are
one's dreams. And one shakes one's head and says how rapidly the years
fly by! And again one asks oneself what has one done with one's years.
Where have you buried your best days? Have you lived or not? Look, one
says to oneself, look how cold the world is growing. Some more years
will pass, and after them will come gloomy solitude; then will come old
age trembling on its crutch, and after it misery and desolation. Your
fantastic world will grow pale, your dreams will fade and die and will
fall like the yellow leaves from the trees.... Oh, Nastenka! you know it
will be sad to be left alone, utterly alone, and to have not even
anything to regret--nothing, absolutely nothing ... for all that you
have lost, all that, all was nothing, stupid, simple nullity, there has
been nothing but dreams!"

"Come, don't work on my feelings any more," said Nastenka, wiping away a
tear which was trickling down her cheek. "Now it's over! Now we shall be
two together. Now, whatever happens to me, we will never part. Listen; I
am a simple girl, I have not had much education, though grandmother did
get a teacher for me, but truly I understand you, for all that you have
described I have been through myself, when grandmother pinned me to her
dress. Of course, I should not have described it so well as you have; I
am not educated," she added timidly, for she was still feeling a sort of
respect for my pathetic eloquence and lofty style; "but I am very glad
that you have been quite open with me. Now I know you thoroughly, all of
you. And do you know what? I want to tell you my history too, all
without concealment, and after that you must give me advice. You are a
very clever man; will you promise to give me advice?"

"Ah, Nastenka," I cried, "though I have never given advice, still less
sensible advice, yet I see now that if we always go on like this that it
will be very sensible, and that each of us will give the other a great
deal of sensible advice! Well, my pretty Nastenka, what sort of advice
do you want? Tell me frankly; at this moment I am so gay and happy, so
bold and sensible, that it won't be difficult for me to find words."

"No, no!" Nastenka interrupted, laughing. "I don't only want sensible
advice, I want warm brotherly advice, as though you had been fond of me
all your life!"

"Agreed, Nastenka, agreed!" I cried delighted; "and if I had been fond
of you for twenty years, I couldn't have been fonder of you than I am
now."

"Your hand," said Nastenka.

"Here it is," said I, giving her my hand.

"And so let us begin my history!"


NASTENKA'S HISTORY

"Half my story you know already--that is, you know that I have an old
grandmother...."

"If the other half is as brief as that ..." I interrupted, laughing.

"Be quiet and listen. First of all you must agree not to interrupt me,
or else, perhaps I shall get in a muddle! Come, listen quietly.

"I have an old grandmother. I came into her hands when I was quite a
little girl, for my father and mother are dead. It must be supposed that
grandmother was once richer, for now she recalls better days. She taught
me French, and then got a teacher for me. When I was fifteen (and now I
am seventeen) we gave up having lessons. It was at that time that I got
into mischief; what I did I won't tell you; it's enough to say that it
wasn't very important. But grandmother called me to her one morning and
said that as she was blind she could not look after me; she took a pin
and pinned my dress to hers, and said that we should sit like that for
the rest of our lives if, of course, I did not become a better girl. In
fact, at first it was impossible to get away from her: I had to work, to
read and to study all beside grandmother. I tried to deceive her once,
and persuaded Fekla to sit in my place. Fekla is our charwoman, she is
deaf. Fekla sat there instead of me; grandmother was asleep in her
armchair at the time, and I went off to see a friend close by. Well, it
ended in trouble. Grandmother woke up while I was out, and asked some
questions; she thought I was still sitting quietly in my place. Fekla
saw that grandmother was asking her something, but could not tell what
it was; she wondered what to do, undid the pin and ran away...."

At this point Nastenka stopped and began laughing. I laughed with her.
She left off at once.

"I tell you what, don't you laugh at grandmother. I laugh because it's
funny.... What can I do, since grandmother is like that; but yet I am
fond of her in a way. Oh, well, I did catch it that time. I had to sit
down in my place at once, and after that I was not allowed to stir.

"Oh, I forgot to tell you that our house belongs to us, that is to
grandmother; it is a little wooden house with three windows as old as
grandmother herself, with a little upper storey; well, there moved into
our upper storey a new lodger."

"Then you had an old lodger," I observed casually.

"Yes, of course," answered Nastenka, "and one who knew how to hold his
tongue better than you do. In fact, he hardly ever used his tongue at
all. He was a dumb, blind, lame, dried-up little old man, so that at
last he could not go on living, he died; so then we had to find a new
lodger, for we could not live without a lodger--the rent, together with
grandmother's pension, is almost all we have. But the new lodger, as
luck would have it, was a young man, a stranger not of these parts. As
he did not haggle over the rent, grandmother accepted him, and only
afterwards she asked me: 'Tell me, Nastenka, what is our lodger like--is
he young or old?' I did not want to lie, so I told grandmother that he
wasn't exactly young and that he wasn't old.

"'And is he pleasant looking?' asked grandmother.

"Again I did not want to tell a lie: 'Yes, he is pleasant looking,
grandmother,' I said. And grandmother said: 'Oh, what a nuisance, what a
nuisance! I tell you this, grandchild, that you may not be looking after
him. What times these are! Why a paltry lodger like this, and he must be
pleasant looking too; it was very different in the old days!'"

"Grandmother was always regretting the old days--she was younger in old
days, and the sun was warmer in old days, and cream did not turn so sour
in old days--it was always the old days! I would sit still and hold my
tongue and think to myself: why did grandmother suggest it to me? Why
did she ask whether the lodger was young and good-looking? But that was
all, I just thought it, began counting my stitches again, went on
knitting my stocking, and forgot all about it.

"Well, one morning the lodger came in to see us; he asked about a
promise to paper his rooms. One thing led to another. Grandmother was
talkative, and she said: 'Go, Nastenka, into my bedroom and bring me my
reckoner.' I jumped up at once; I blushed all over, I don't know why,
and forgot I was sitting pinned to grandmother; instead of quietly
undoing the pin, so that the lodger should not see--I jumped so that
grandmother's chair moved. When I saw that the lodger knew all about me
now, I blushed, stood still as though I had been shot, and suddenly
began to cry--I felt so ashamed and miserable at that minute, that I
didn't know where to look! Grandmother called out, 'What are you waiting
for?' and I went on worse than ever. When the lodger saw, saw that I was
ashamed on his account, he bowed and went away at once!

"After that I felt ready to die at the least sound in the passage. 'It's
the lodger,' I kept thinking; I stealthily undid the pin in case. But it
always turned out not to be, he never came. A fortnight passed; the
lodger sent word through Fyokla that he had a great number of French
books, and that they were all good books that I might read, so would not
grandmother like me to read them that I might not be dull? Grandmother
agreed with gratitude, but kept asking if they were moral books, for if
the books were immoral it would be out of the question, one would learn
evil from them."

"'And what should I learn, grandmother? What is there written in them?'

"'Ah,' she said, 'what's described in them, is how young men seduce
virtuous girls; how, on the excuse that they want to marry them, they
carry them off from their parents' houses; how afterwards they leave
these unhappy girls to their fate, and they perish in the most pitiful
way. I read a great many books,' said grandmother, 'and it is all so
well described that one sits up all night and reads them on the sly. So
mind you don't read them, Nastenka,' said she. 'What books has he sent?'

"'They are all Walter Scott's novels, grandmother.'

"'Walter Scott's novels! But stay, isn't there some trick about it?
Look, hasn't he stuck a love-letter among them?'

"'No, grandmother,' I said, 'there isn't a love-letter.'

"'But look under the binding; they sometimes stuff it under the
bindings, the rascals!'

"'No, grandmother, there is nothing under the binding.'

"'Well, that's all right.'

"So we began reading Walter Scott, and in a month or so we had read
almost half. Then he sent us more and more. He sent us Pushkin, too; so
that at last I could not get on without a book and left off dreaming of
how fine it would be to marry a Chinese Prince.

"That's how things were when I chanced one day to meet our lodger on the
stairs. Grandmother had sent me to fetch something. He stopped, I
blushed and he blushed; he laughed, though, said good-morning to me,
asked after grandmother, and said, 'Well, have you read the books?' I
answered that I had. 'Which did you like best?' he asked. I said,
'Ivanhoe, and Pushkin best of all,' and so our talk ended for that time.

"A week later I met him again on the stairs. That time grandmother had
not sent me, I wanted to get something for myself. It was past two, and
the lodger used to come home at that time. 'Good-afternoon,' said he. I
said good-afternoon, too.

"'Aren't you dull,' he said, 'sitting all day with your grandmother?'

"When he asked that, I blushed, I don't know why; I felt ashamed, and
again I felt offended--I suppose because other people had begun to ask
me about that. I wanted to go away without answering, but I hadn't the
strength.

"'Listen,' he said, 'you are a good girl. Excuse my speaking to you like
that, but I assure you that I wish for your welfare quite as much as
your grandmother. Have you no friends that you could go and visit?'

"I told him I hadn't any, that I had had no friend but Mashenka, and she
had gone away to Pskov.

"'Listen,' he said, 'would you like to go to the theatre with me?'

"'To the theatre. What about grandmother?'

"'But you must go without your grandmother's knowing it,' he said.

"'No,' I said, 'I don't want to deceive grandmother. Good-bye.'

"'Well, good-bye,' he answered, and said nothing more.

"Only after dinner he came to see us; sat a long time talking to
grandmother; asked her whether she ever went out anywhere, whether she
had acquaintances, and suddenly said: 'I have taken a box at the opera
for this evening; they are giving _The Barber of Seville_. My friends
meant to go, but afterwards refused, so the ticket is left on my hands.'
'_The Barber of Seville_,' cried grandmother; 'why, the same they used
to act in old days?'

"'Yes, it's the same barber,' he said, and glanced at me. I saw what it
meant and turned crimson, and my heart began throbbing with suspense.

"'To be sure, I know it,' said grandmother; 'why, I took the part of
Rosina myself in old days, at a private performance!'

"'So wouldn't you like to go to-day?' said the lodger. 'Or my ticket
will be wasted.'

"'By all means let us go,' said grandmother; why shouldn't we? And my
Nastenka here has never been to the theatre.'

"My goodness, what joy! We got ready at once, put on our best clothes,
and set off. Though grandmother was blind, still she wanted to hear the
music; besides, she is a kind old soul, what she cared most for was to
amuse me, we should never have gone of ourselves.

"What my impressions of _The Barber of Seville_ were I won't tell you;
but all that evening our lodger looked at me so nicely, talked so
nicely, that I saw at once that he had meant to test me in the morning
when he proposed that I should go with him alone. Well, it was joy! I
went to bed so proud, so gay, my heart beat so that I was a little
feverish, and all night I was raving about _The Barber of Seville_.

"I expected that he would come and see us more and more often after
that, but it wasn't so at all. He almost entirely gave up coming. He
would just come in about once a month, and then only to invite us to the
theatre. We went twice again. Only I wasn't at all pleased with that; I
saw that he was simply sorry for me because I was so hardly treated by
grandmother, and that was all. As time went on, I grew more and more
restless, I couldn't sit still, I couldn't read, I couldn't work;
sometimes I laughed and did something to annoy grandmother, at another
time I would cry. At last I grew thin and was very nearly ill. The opera
season was over, and our lodger had quite given up coming to see us;
whenever we met--always on the same staircase, of course--he would bow
so silently, so gravely, as though he did not want to speak, and go down
to the front door, while I went on standing in the middle of the stairs,
as red as a cherry, for all the blood rushed to my head at the sight of
him.

"Now the end is near. Just a year ago, in May, the lodger came to us and
said to grandmother that he had finished his business here, and that he
must go back to Moscow for a year. When I heard that, I sank into a
chair half dead; grandmother did not notice anything; and having
informed us that he should be leaving us, he bowed and went away.

"What was I to do? I thought and thought and fretted and fretted, and at
last I made up my mind. Next day he was to go away, and I made up my
mind to end it all that evening when grandmother went to bed. And so it
happened. I made up all my clothes in a parcel--all the linen I
needed--and with the parcel in my hand, more dead than alive, went
upstairs to our lodger. I believe I must have stayed an hour on the
staircase. When I opened his door he cried out as he looked at me. He
thought I was a ghost, and rushed to give me some water, for I could
hardly stand up. My heart beat so violently that my head ached, and I
did not know what I was doing. When I recovered I began by laying my
parcel on his bed, sat down beside it, hid my face in my hands and went
into floods of tears. I think he understood it all at once, and looked
at me so sadly that my heart was torn.

"'Listen,' he began, 'listen, Nastenka, I can't do anything; I am a poor
man, for I have nothing, not even a decent berth. How could we live, if
I were to marry you?'

"We talked a long time; but at last I got quite frantic, I said I could
not go on living with grandmother, that I should run away from her, that
I did not want to be pinned to her, and that I would go to Moscow if he
liked, because I could not live without him. Shame and pride and love
were all clamouring in me at once, and I fell on the bed almost in
convulsions, I was so afraid of a refusal.

"He sat for some minutes in silence, then got up, came up to me and took
me by the hand.

"'Listen, my dear good Nastenka, listen; I swear to you that if I am
ever in a position to marry, you shall make my happiness. I assure you
that now you are the only one who could make me happy. Listen, I am
going to Moscow and shall be there just a year; I hope to establish my
position. When I come back, if you still love me, I swear that we will
be happy. Now it is impossible, I am not able, I have not the right to
promise anything. Well, I repeat, if it is not within a year it will
certainly be some time; that is, of course, if you do not prefer any one
else, for I cannot and dare not bind you by any sort of promise.'

"That was what he said to me, and next day he went away. We agreed
together not to say a word to grandmother: that was his wish. Well, my
history is nearly finished now. Just a year has past. He has arrived; he
has been here three days, and, and----"

"And what?" I cried, impatient to hear the end.

"And up to now has not shown himself!" answered Nastenka, as though
screwing up all her courage. "There's no sign or sound of him."

Here she stopped, paused for a minute, bent her head, and covering her
face with her hands broke into such sobs that it sent a pang to my heart
to hear them. I had not in the least expected such a _dénouement_.

"Nastenka," I began timidly in an ingratiating voice, "Nastenka! For
goodness' sake don't cry! How do you know? Perhaps he is not here
yet...."

"He is, he is," Nastenka repeated. "He is here, and I know it. We _made
an agreement_ at the time, that evening, before he went away: when we
said all that I have told you, and had come to an understanding, then we
came out here for a walk on this embankment. It was ten o'clock; we sat
on this seat. I was not crying then; it was sweet to me to hear what he
said.... And he said that he would come to us directly he arrived, and
if I did not refuse him, then we would tell grandmother about it all.
Now he is here, I know it, and yet he does not come!"

And again she burst into tears.

"Good God, can I do nothing to help you in your sorrow?" I cried jumping
up from the seat in utter despair. "Tell me, Nastenka, wouldn't it be
possible for me to go to him?"

"Would that be possible?" she asked suddenly, raising her head.

"No, of course not," I said pulling myself up; "but I tell you what,
write a letter."

"No, that's impossible, I can't do that," she answered with decision,
bending her head and not looking at me.

"How impossible--why is it impossible?" I went on, clinging to my idea.
"But, Nastenka, it depends what sort of letter; there are letters and
letters and.... Ah, Nastenka, I am right; trust to me, trust to me, I
will not give you bad advice. It can all be arranged! You took the first
step--why not now?"

"I can't. I can't! It would seem as though I were forcing myself on
him...."

"Ah, my good little Nastenka," I said, hardly able to conceal a smile;
"no, no, you have a right to, in fact, because he made you a promise.
Besides, I can see from everything that he is a man of delicate feeling;
that he behaved very well," I went on, more and more carried away by the
logic of my own arguments and convictions. "How did he behave? He bound
himself by a promise: he said that if he married at all he would marry
no one but you; he gave you full liberty to refuse him at once.... Under
such circumstances you may take the first step; you have the right; you
are in the privileged position--if, for instance, you wanted to free him
from his promise...."

"Listen; how would you write?"

"Write what?"

"This letter."

"I tell you how I would write: 'Dear Sir.'..."

"Must I really begin like that, 'Dear Sir'?"

"You certainly must! Though, after all, I don't know, I imagine...."

"Well, well, what next?"

"'Dear Sir,--I must apologize for----' But, no, there's no need to
apologize; the fact itself justifies everything. Write simply:--

    "'I am writing to you. Forgive me my impatience; but I have
    been happy for a whole year in hope; am I to blame for being
    unable to endure a day of doubt now? Now that you have come,
    perhaps you have changed your mind. If so, this letter is to
    tell you that I do not repine, nor blame you. I do not blame
    you because I have no power over your heart, such is my
    fate!

    "'You are an honourable man. You will not smile or be vexed
    at these impatient lines. Remember they are written by a
    poor girl; that she is alone; that she has no one to direct
    her, no one to advise her, and that she herself could never
    control her heart. But forgive me that a doubt has
    stolen--if only for one instant--into my heart. You are not
    capable of insulting, even in thought, her who so loved and
    so loves you.'"

"Yes, yes; that's exactly what I was thinking!" cried Nastenka, and her
eyes beamed with delight. "Oh, you have solved my difficulties: God has
sent you to me! Thank you, thank you!"

"What for? What for? For God's sending me?" I answered, looking
delighted at her joyful little face. "Why, yes; for that too."

"Ah, Nastenka! Why, one thanks some people for being alive at the same
time with one; I thank you for having met me, for my being able to
remember you all my life!"

"Well, enough, enough! But now I tell you what, listen: we made an
agreement then that as soon as he arrived he would let me know, by
leaving a letter with some good simple people of my acquaintance who
know nothing about it; or, if it were impossible to write a letter to
me, for a letter does not always tell everything, he would be here at
ten o'clock on the day he arrived, where we had arranged to meet. I know
he has arrived already; but now it's the third day, and there's no sign
of him and no letter. It's impossible for me to get away from
grandmother in the morning. Give my letter to-morrow to those kind
people I spoke to you about: they will send it on to him, and if there
is an answer you bring it to-morrow at ten o'clock."

"But the letter, the letter! You see, you must write the letter first!
So perhaps it must all be the day after to-morrow."

"The letter ..." said Nastenka, a little confused, "the letter ...
but...."

But she did not finish. At first she turned her little face away from
me, flushed like a rose, and suddenly I felt in my hand a letter which
had evidently been written long before, all ready and sealed up. A
familiar sweet and charming reminiscence floated through my mind.

"R, o--Ro; s, i--si; n, a--na," I began.

"Rosina!" we both hummed together; I almost embracing her with delight,
while she blushed as only she could blush, and laughed through the tears
which gleamed like pearls on her black eyelashes.

"Come, enough, enough! Good-bye now," she said speaking rapidly. "Here
is the letter, here is the address to which you are to take it.
Good-bye, till we meet again! Till to-morrow!"

She pressed both my hands warmly, nodded her head, and flew like an
arrow down her side street. I stood still for a long time following her
with my eyes.

"Till to-morrow! till to-morrow!" was ringing in my ears as she vanished
from my sight.


THIRD NIGHT

To-day was a gloomy, rainy day without a glimmer of sunlight, like the
old age before me. I am oppressed by such strange thoughts, such gloomy
sensations; questions still so obscure to me are crowding into my
brain--and I seem to have neither power nor will to settle them. It's
not for me to settle all this!

To-day we shall not meet. Yesterday, when we said good-bye, the clouds
began gathering over the sky and a mist rose. I said that to-morrow it
would be a bad day; she made no answer, she did not want to speak
against her wishes; for her that day was bright and clear, not one cloud
should obscure her happiness.

"If it rains we shall not see each other," she said, "I shall not come."

I thought that she would not notice to-day's rain, and yet she has not
come.

Yesterday was our third interview, our third white night....

But how fine joy and happiness makes any one! How brimming over with
love the heart is! One seems longing to pour out one's whole heart; one
wants everything to be gay, everything to be laughing. And how
infectious that joy is! There was such a softness in her words, such a
kindly feeling in her heart towards me yesterday.... How solicitous and
friendly she was; how tenderly she tried to give me courage! Oh, the
coquetry of happiness! While I ... I took it all for the genuine thing,
I thought that she....

But, my God, how could I have thought it? How could I have been so
blind, when everything had been taken by another already, when nothing
was mine; when, in fact, her very tenderness to me, her anxiety, her
love ... yes, love for me, was nothing else but joy at the thought of
seeing another man so soon, desire to include me, too, in her
happiness?... When he did not come, when we waited in vain, she frowned,
she grew timid and discouraged. Her movements, her words, were no longer
so light, so playful, so gay; and, strange to say, she redoubled her
attentiveness to me, as though instinctively desiring to lavish on me
what she desired for herself so anxiously, if her wishes were not
accomplished. My Nastenka was so downcast, so dismayed, that I think she
realized at last that I loved her, and was sorry for my poor love. So
when we are unhappy we feel the unhappiness of others more; feeling is
not destroyed but concentrated....

I went to meet her with a full heart, and was all impatience. I had no
presentiment that I should feel as I do now, that it would not all end
happily. She was beaming with pleasure; she was expecting an answer. The
answer was himself. He was to come, to run at her call. She arrived a
whole hour before I did. At first she giggled at everything, laughed at
every word I said. I began talking, but relapsed into silence.

"Do you know why I am so glad," she said, "so glad to look at you?--why
I like you so much to-day?"

"Well?" I asked, and my heart began throbbing.

"I like you because you have not fallen in love with me. You know that
some men in your place would have been pestering and worrying me, would
have been sighing and miserable, while you are so nice!"

Then she wrung my hand so hard that I almost cried out. She laughed.

"Goodness, what a friend you are!" she began gravely a minute later.
"God sent you to me. What would have happened to me if you had not been
with me now? How disinterested you are! How truly you care for me! When
I am married we will be great friends, more than brother and sister; I
shall care almost as I do for him...."

I felt horribly sad at that moment, yet something like laughter was
stirring in my soul.

"You are very much upset," I said; "you are frightened; you think he
won't come."

"Oh dear!" she answered; "if I were less happy, I believe I should cry
at your lack of faith, at your reproaches. However, you have made me
think and have given me a lot to think about; but I shall think later,
and now I will own that you are right. Yes, I am somehow not myself; I
am all suspense, and feel everything as it were too lightly. But hush!
that's enough about feelings...."

At that moment we heard footsteps, and in the darkness we saw a figure
coming towards us. We both started; she almost cried out; I dropped her
hand and made a movement as though to walk away. But we were mistaken,
it was not he.

"What are you afraid of? Why did you let go of my hand?" she said,
giving it to me again. "Come, what is it? We will meet him together; I
want him to see how fond we are of each other."

"How fond we are of each other!" I cried. ("Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka," I
thought, "how much you have told me in that saying! Such fondness at
_certain_ moments makes the heart cold and the soul heavy. Your hand is
cold, mine burns like fire. How blind you are, Nastenka!... Oh, how
unbearable a happy person is sometimes! But I could not be angry with
you!")

At last my heart was too full.

"Listen, Nastenka!" I cried. "Do you know how it has been with me all
day."

"Why, how, how? Tell me quickly! Why have you said nothing all this
time?"

"To begin with, Nastenka, when I had carried out all your commissions,
given the letter, gone to see your good friends, then ... then I went
home and went to bed."

"Is that all?" she interrupted, laughing.

"Yes, almost all," I answered restraining myself, for foolish tears were
already starting into my eyes. "I woke an hour before our appointment,
and yet, as it were, I had not been asleep. I don't know what happened
to me. I came to tell you all about it, feeling as though time were
standing still, feeling as though one sensation, one feeling must remain
with me from that time for ever; feeling as though one minute must go on
for all eternity, and as though all life had come to a standstill for
me.... When I woke up it seemed as though some musical motive long
familiar, heard somewhere in the past, forgotten and voluptuously sweet,
had come back to me now. It seemed to me that it had been clamouring at
my heart all my life, and only now...."

"Oh my goodness, my goodness," Nastenka interrupted, "what does all that
mean? I don't understand a word."

"Ah, Nastenka, I wanted somehow to convey to you that strange
impression...." I began in a plaintive voice, in which there still lay
hid a hope, though a very faint one.

"Leave off. Hush!" she said, and in one instant the sly puss had
guessed.

Suddenly she became extraordinarily talkative, gay, mischievous; she
took my arm, laughed, wanted me to laugh too, and every confused word I
uttered evoked from her prolonged ringing laughter.... I began to feel
angry, she had suddenly begun flirting.

"Do you know," she began, "I feel a little vexed that you are not in
love with me? There's no understanding human nature! But all the same,
Mr. Unapproachable, you cannot blame me for being so simple; I tell you
everything, everything, whatever foolish thought comes into my head."

"Listen! That's eleven, I believe," I said as the slow chime of a bell
rang out from a distant tower. She suddenly stopped, left off laughing
and began to count.

"Yes, it's eleven," she said at last in a timid, uncertain voice.

I regretted at once that I had frightened her, making her count the
strokes, and I cursed myself for my spiteful impulse; I felt sorry for
her, and did not know how to atone for what I had done.

I began comforting her, seeking for reasons for his not coming,
advancing various arguments, proofs. No one could have been easier to
deceive than she was at that moment; and, indeed, any one at such a
moment listens gladly to any consolation, whatever it may be, and is
overjoyed if a shadow of excuse can be found.

"And indeed it's an absurd thing," I began, warming to my task and
admiring the extraordinary clearness of my argument, "why, he could not
have come; you have muddled and confused me, Nastenka, so that I too,
have lost count of the time.... Only think: he can scarcely have
received the letter; suppose he is not able to come, suppose he is going
to answer the letter, could not come before to-morrow. I will go for it
as soon as it's light to-morrow and let you know at once. Consider,
there are thousands of possibilities; perhaps he was not at home when
the letter came, and may not have read it even now! Anything may happen,
you know."

"Yes, yes!" said Nastenka. "I did not think of that. Of course anything
may happen?" she went on in a tone that offered no opposition, though
some other far-away thought could be heard like a vexatious discord in
it. "I tell you what you must do," she said, "you go as early as
possible to-morrow morning, and if you get anything let me know at once.
You know where I live, don't you?"

And she began repeating her address to me.

Then she suddenly became so tender, so solicitous with me. She seemed to
listen attentively to what I told her; but when I asked her some
question she was silent, was confused, and turned her head away. I
looked into her eyes--yes, she was crying.

"How can you? How can you? Oh, what a baby you are! what
childishness!... Come, come!"

She tried to smile, to calm herself, but her chin was quivering and her
bosom was still heaving.

"I was thinking about you," she said after a minute's silence. "You are
so kind that I should be a stone if I did not feel it. Do you know what
has occurred to me now? I was comparing you two. Why isn't he you? Why
isn't he like you? He is not as good as you, though I love him more than
you."

I made no answer. She seemed to expect me to say something.

"Of course, it may be that I don't understand him fully yet. You know I
was always as it were afraid of him; he was always so grave, as it were
so proud. Of course I know it's only that he seems like that, I know
there is more tenderness in his heart than in mine.... I remember how he
looked at me when I went in to him--do you remember?--with my bundle;
but yet I respect him too much, and doesn't that show that we are not
equals?"

"No, Nastenka, no," I answered, "it shows that you love him more than
anything in the world, and far more than yourself."

"Yes, supposing that is so," answered Nastenka naïvely. "But do you know
what strikes me now? Only I am not talking about him now, but speaking
generally; all this came into my mind some time ago. Tell me, how is it
that we can't all be like brothers together? Why is it that even the
best of men always seem to hide something from other people and to keep
something back? Why not say straight out what is in one's heart, when
one knows that one is not speaking idly? As it is every one seems
harsher than he really is, as though all were afraid of doing injustice
to their feelings, by being too quick to express them."

"Oh, Nastenka, what you say is true; but there are many reasons for
that," I broke in suppressing my own feelings at that moment more than
ever.

"No, no!" she answered with deep feeling. "Here you, for instance, are
not like other people! I really don't know how to tell you what I feel;
but it seems to me that you, for instance ... at the present moment ...
it seems to me that you are sacrificing something for me," she added
timidly, with a fleeting glance at me. "Forgive me for saying so, I am a
simple girl you know. I have seen very little of life, and I really
sometimes don't know how to say things," she added in a voice that
quivered with some hidden feeling, while she tried to smile; "but I only
wanted to tell you that I am grateful, that I feel it all too.... Oh,
may God give you happiness for it! What you told me about your dreamer
is quite untrue now--that is, I mean, it's not true of you. You are
recovering, you are quite a different man from what you described. If
you ever fall in love with some one, God give you happiness with her! I
won't wish anything for her, for she will be happy with you. I know, I
am a woman myself, so you must believe me when I tell you so."

She ceased speaking, and pressed my hand warmly. I too could not speak
without emotion. Some minutes passed.

"Yes, it's clear he won't come to-night," she said at last raising her
head. "It's late."

"He will come to-morrow," I said in the most firm and convincing tone.

"Yes," she added with no sign of her former depression. "I see for
myself now that he could not come till to-morrow. Well, good-bye, till
to-morrow. If it rains perhaps I shall not come. But the day after
to-morrow, I shall come. I shall come for certain, whatever happens; be
sure to be here, I want to see you, I will tell you everything."

And then when we parted she gave me her hand and said, looking at me
candidly: "We shall always be together, shan't we?"

Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! If only you knew how lonely I am now!

As soon as it struck nine o'clock I could not stay indoors, but put on
my things, and went out in spite of the weather. I was there, sitting on
our seat. I went to her street, but I felt ashamed, and turned back
without looking at their windows, when I was two steps from her door. I
went home more depressed than I had ever been before. What a damp,
dreary day! If it had been fine I should have walked about all night....

But to-morrow, to-morrow! To-morrow she will tell me everything. The
letter has not come to-day, however. But that was to be expected. They
are together by now....


FOURTH NIGHT

My God, how it has all ended! What it has all ended in! I arrived at
nine o'clock. She was already there. I noticed her a good way off; she
was standing as she had been that first time, with her elbows on the
railing, and she did not hear me coming up to her.

"Nastenka!" I called to her, suppressing my agitation with an effort.

She turned to me quickly.

"Well?" she said. "Well? Make haste!"

I looked at her in perplexity.

"Well, where is the letter? Have you brought the letter?" she repeated
clutching at the railing.

"No, there is no letter," I said at last. "Hasn't he been to you yet?"
She turned fearfully pale and looked at me for a long time without
moving. I had shattered her last hope.

"Well, God be with him," she said at last in a breaking voice; "God be
with him if he leaves me like that."

She dropped her eyes, then tried to look at me and could not. For
several minutes she was struggling with her emotion. All at once she
turned away, leaning her elbows against the railing and burst into
tears.

"Oh don't, don't!" I began; but looking at her I had not the heart to go
on, and what was I to say to her?

"Don't try and comfort me," she said; "don't talk about him; don't tell
me that he will come, that he has not cast me off so cruelly and so
inhumanly as he has. What for--what for? Can there have been something
in my letter, that unlucky letter?"

At that point sobs stifled her voice; my heart was torn as I looked at
her.

"Oh, how inhumanly cruel it is!" she began again. "And not a line, not a
line! He might at least have written that he does not want me, that he
rejects me--but not a line for three days! How easy it is for him to
wound, to insult a poor, defenceless girl, whose only fault is that she
loves him! Oh, what I've suffered during these three days! Oh, dear!
When I think that I was the first to go to him, that I humbled myself
before him, cried, that I begged of him a little love!... and after
that! Listen," she said, turning to me, and her black eyes flashed, "it
isn't so! It can't be so; it isn't natural. Either you are mistaken or
I; perhaps he has not received the letter? Perhaps he still knows
nothing about it? How could any one--judge for yourself, tell me, for
goodness' sake explain it to me, I can't understand it--how could any
one behave with such barbarous coarseness as he has behaved to me? Not
one word! Why, the lowest creature on earth is treated more
compassionately. Perhaps he has heard something, perhaps some one has
told him something about me," she cried, turning to me inquiringly:
"What do you think?"

"Listen, Nastenka, I shall go to him to-morrow in your name."

"Yes?"

"I will question him about everything; I will tell him everything."

"Yes, yes?"

"You write a letter. Don't say no, Nastenka, don't say no! I will make
him respect your action, he shall hear all about it, and if----"

"No, my friend, no," she interrupted. "Enough! Not another word, not
another line from me--enough! I don't know him; I don't love him any
more. I will ... forget him."

She could not go on.

"Calm yourself, calm yourself! Sit here, Nastenka," I said, making her
sit down on the seat.

"I am calm. Don't trouble. It's nothing! It's only tears, they will soon
dry. Why, do you imagine I shall do away with myself, that I shall throw
myself into the river?"

My heart was full: I tried to speak, but I could not.

"Listen," she said taking my hand. "Tell me: you wouldn't have behaved
like this, would you? You would not have abandoned a girl who had come
to you of herself, you would not have thrown into her face a shameless
taunt at her weak foolish heart? You would have taken care of her? You
would have realized that she was alone, that she did not know how to
look after herself, that she could not guard herself from loving you,
that it was not her fault, not her fault--that she had done nothing....
Oh dear, oh dear!"

"Nastenka!" I cried at last, unable to control my emotion. "Nastenka,
you torture me! You wound my heart, you are killing me, Nastenka! I
cannot be silent! I must speak at last, give utterance to what is
surging in my heart!"

As I said this I got up from the seat. She took my hand and looked at me
in surprise.

"What is the matter with you?" she said at last.

"Listen," I said resolutely. "Listen to me, Nastenka! What I am going to
say to you now is all nonsense, all impossible, all stupid! I know that
this can never be, but I cannot be silent. For the sake of what you are
suffering now, I beg you beforehand to forgive me!"

"What is it? What is it?" she said drying her tears and looking at me
intently, while a strange curiosity gleamed in her astonished eyes.
"What is the matter?"

"It's impossible, but I love you, Nastenka! There it is! Now everything
is told," I said with a wave of my hand. "Now you will see whether you
can go on talking to me as you did just now, whether you can listen to
what I am going to say to you."...

"Well, what then?" Nastenka interrupted me. "What of it? I knew you
loved me long ago, only I always thought that you simply liked me very
much.... Oh dear, oh dear!"

"At first it was simply liking, Nastenka, but now, now! I am just in the
same position as you were when you went to him with your bundle. In a
worse position than you, Nastenka, because he cared for no one else as
you do."

"What are you saying to me! I don't understand you in the least. But
tell me, what's this for; I don't mean what for, but why are you ... so
suddenly.... Oh dear, I am talking nonsense! But you...."

And Nastenka broke off in confusion. Her cheeks flamed; she dropped her
eyes.

"What's to be done, Nastenka, what am I to do? I am to blame. I have
abused your.... But no, no, I am not to blame, Nastenka; I feel that, I
know that, because my heart tells me I am right, for I cannot hurt you
in any way, I cannot wound you! I was your friend, but I am still your
friend, I have betrayed no trust. Here my tears are falling, Nastenka.
Let them flow, let them flow--they don't hurt anybody. They will dry,
Nastenka."

"Sit down, sit down," she said, making me sit down on the seat. "Oh, my
God!"

"No, Nastenka, I won't sit down; I cannot stay here any longer, you
cannot see me again; I will tell you everything and go away. I only want
to say that you would never have found out that I loved you. I should
have kept my secret. I would not have worried you at such a moment with
my egoism. No! But I could not resist it now; you spoke of it yourself,
it is your fault, your fault and not mine. You cannot drive me away from
you."...

"No, no, I don't drive you away, no!" said Nastenka, concealing her
confusion as best she could, poor child.

"You don't drive me away? No! But I meant to run from you myself. I will
go away, but first I will tell you all, for when you were crying here I
could not sit unmoved, when you wept, when you were in torture at
being--at being--I will speak of it, Nastenka--at being forsaken, at
your love being repulsed, I felt that in my heart there was so much love
for you, Nastenka, so much love! And it seemed so bitter that I could
not help you with my love, that my heart was breaking and I ... I could
not be silent, I had to speak, Nastenka, I had to speak!"

"Yes, yes! tell me, talk to me," said Nastenka with an indescribable
gesture. "Perhaps you think it strange that I talk to you like this, but
... speak! I will tell you afterwards! I will tell you everything."

"You are sorry for me, Nastenka, you are simply sorry for me, my dear
little friend! What's done can't be mended. What is said cannot be taken
back. Isn't that so? Well, now you know. That's the starting-point. Very
well. Now it's all right, only listen. When you were sitting crying I
thought to myself (oh, let me tell you what I was thinking!), I thought,
that (of course it cannot be, Nastenka), I thought that you ... I
thought that you somehow ... quite apart from me, had ceased to love
him. Then--I thought that yesterday and the day before yesterday,
Nastenka--then I would--I certainly would--have succeeded in making you
love me; you know, you said yourself, Nastenka, that you almost loved
me. Well, what next? Well, that's nearly all I wanted to tell you; all
that is left to say is how it would be if you loved me, only that,
nothing more! Listen, my friend--for any way you are my friend--I am, of
course, a poor, humble man, of no great consequence; but that's not the
point (I don't seem to be able to say what I mean, Nastenka, I am so
confused), only I would love you, I would love you so, that even if you
still loved him, even if you went on loving the man I don't know, you
would never feel that my love was a burden to you. You would only feel
every minute that at your side was beating a grateful, grateful heart, a
warm heart ready for your sake.... Oh Nastenka, Nastenka! What have you
done to me?"

"Don't cry; I don't want you to cry," said Nastenka getting up quickly
from the seat. "Come along, get up, come with me, don't cry, don't cry,"
she said, drying her tears with her handkerchief; "let us go now; maybe
I will tell you something.... If he has forsaken me now, if he has
forgotten me, though I still love him (I do not want to deceive you) ...
but listen, answer me. If I were to love you, for instance, that is, if
I only.... Oh my friend, my friend! To think, to think how I wounded
you, when I laughed at your love, when I praised you for not falling in
love with me. Oh dear! How was it I did not foresee this, how was it I
did not foresee this, how could I have been so stupid? But.... Well, I
have made up my mind, I will tell you."

"Look here, Nastenka, do you know what? I'll go away, that's what I'll
do. I am simply tormenting you. Here you are remorseful for having
laughed at me, and I won't have you ... in addition to your sorrow....
Of course it is my fault, Nastenka, but good-bye!"

"Stay, listen to me: can you wait?"

"What for? How?"

"I love him; but I shall get over it, I must get over it, I cannot fail
to get over it; I am getting over it, I feel that.... Who knows? Perhaps
it will all end to-day, for I hate him, for he has been laughing at me,
while you have been weeping here with me, for you have not repulsed me
as he has, for you love me while he has never loved me, for in fact, I
love you myself.... Yes, I love you! I love you as you love me; I have
told you so before, you heard it yourself--I love you because you are
better than he is, because you are nobler than he is, because, because
he----"

The poor girl's emotion was so violent that she could not say more; she
laid her head upon my shoulder, then upon my bosom, and wept bitterly. I
comforted her, I persuaded her, but she could not stop crying; she kept
pressing my hand, and saying between her sobs: "Wait, wait, it will be
over in a minute! I want to tell you ... you mustn't think that these
tears--it's nothing, it's weakness, wait till it's over."... At last she
left off crying, dried her eyes and we walked on again. I wanted to
speak, but she still begged me to wait. We were silent.... At last she
plucked up courage and began to speak.

"It's like this," she began in a weak and quivering voice, in which,
however, there was a note that pierced my heart with a sweet pang;
"don't think that I am so light and inconstant, don't think that I can
forget and change so quickly. I have loved him for a whole year, and I
swear by God that I have never, never, even in thought, been unfaithful
to him.... He has despised me, he has been laughing at me--God forgive
him! But he has insulted me and wounded my heart. I ... I do not love
him, for I can only love what is magnanimous, what understands me, what
is generous; for I am like that myself and he is not worthy of me--well,
that's enough of him. He has done better than if he had deceived my
expectations later, and shown me later what he was.... Well, it's over!
But who knows, my dear friend," she went on pressing my hand, "who
knows, perhaps my whole love was a mistaken feeling, a delusion--perhaps
it began in mischief, in nonsense, because I was kept so strictly by
grandmother? Perhaps I ought to love another man, not him, a different
man, who would have pity on me and ... and.... But don't let us say any
more about that," Nastenka broke off, breathless with emotion, "I only
wanted to tell you ... I wanted to tell you that if, although I love him
(no, did love him), if, in spite of this you still say.... If you feel
that your love is so great that it may at last drive from my heart my
old feeling--if you will have pity on me--if you do not want to leave me
alone to my fate, without hope, without consolation--if you are ready to
love me always as you do now--I swear to you that gratitude ... that my
love will be at last worthy of your love.... Will you take my hand?"

"Nastenka!" I cried breathless with sobs. "Nastenka, oh Nastenka!"

"Enough, enough! Well, now it's quite enough," she said, hardly able to
control herself. "Well, now all has been said, hasn't it! Hasn't it? You
are happy--I am happy too. Not another word about it, wait; spare me ...
talk of something else, for God's sake."

"Yes, Nastenka, yes! Enough about that, now I am happy. I---- Yes,
Nastenka, yes, let us talk of other things, let us make haste and talk.
Yes! I am ready."

And we did not know what to say: we laughed, we wept, we said thousands
of things meaningless and incoherent; at one moment we walked along the
pavement, then suddenly turned back and crossed the road; then we
stopped and went back again to the embankment; we were like children.

"I am living alone now, Nastenka," I began, "but to-morrow! Of course
you know, Nastenka, I am poor, I have only got twelve hundred roubles,
but that doesn't matter."

"Of course not, and granny has her pension, so she will be no burden. We
must take granny."

"Of course we must take granny. But there's Matrona."

"Yes, and we've got Fyokla too!"

"Matrona is a good woman, but she has one fault: she has no imagination,
Nastenka, absolutely none; but that doesn't matter."

"That's all right--they can live together; only you must move to us
to-morrow."

"To you? How so? All right, I am ready."

"Yes, hire a room from us. We have a top floor, it's empty. We had an
old lady lodging there, but she has gone away; and I know granny would
like to have a young man. I said to her, 'Why a young man?' And she
said, 'Oh, because I am old; only don't you fancy, Nastenka, that I want
him as a husband for you.' So I guessed it was with that idea."

"Oh, Nastenka!"

And we both laughed.

"Come, that's enough, that's enough. But where do you live? I've
forgotten."

"Over that way, near X bridge, Barannikov's Buildings."

"It's that big house?"

"Yes, that big house."

"Oh, I know, a nice house; only you know you had better give it up and
come to us as soon as possible."

"To-morrow, Nastenka, to-morrow; I owe a little for my rent there but
that doesn't matter. I shall soon get my salary."

"And do you know I will perhaps give lessons; I will learn something
myself and then give lessons."

"Capital! And I shall soon get a bonus."

"So by to-morrow you will be my lodger."

"And we will go to _The Barber of Seville_, for they are soon going to
give it again."

"Yes, we'll go," said Nastenka, "but better see something else and not
_The Barber of Seville_."

"Very well, something else. Of course that will be better, I did not
think----"

As we talked like this we walked along in a sort of delirium, a sort of
intoxication, as though we did not know what was happening to us. At one
moment we stopped and talked for a long time at the same place; then we
went on again, and goodness knows where we went; and again tears and
again laughter. All of a sudden Nastenka would want to go home, and I
would not dare to detain her but would want to see her to the house; we
set off, and in a quarter of an hour found ourselves at the embankment
by our seat. Then she would sigh, and tears would come into her eyes
again; I would turn chill with dismay.... But she would press my hand
and force me to walk, to talk, to chatter as before.

"It's time I was home at last; I think it must be very late," Nastenka
said at last. "We must give over being childish."

"Yes, Nastenka, only I shan't sleep to-night; I am not going home."

"I don't think I shall sleep either; only see me home."

"I should think so!"

"Only this time we really must get to the house."

"We must, we must."

"Honour bright? For you know one must go home some time!"

"Honour bright," I answered laughing.

"Well, come along!"

"Come along! Look at the sky, Nastenka. Look! To-morrow it will be a
lovely day; what a blue sky, what a moon! Look; that yellow cloud is
covering it now, look, look! No, it has passed by. Look, look!"

But Nastenka did not look at the cloud; she stood mute as though turned
to stone; a minute later she huddled timidly close up to me. Her hand
trembled in my hand; I looked at her. She pressed still more closely to
me.

At that moment a young man passed by us. He suddenly stopped, looked at
us intently, and then again took a few steps on. My heart began
throbbing.

"Who is it, Nastenka?" I said in an undertone.

"It's he," she answered in a whisper, huddling up to me, still more
closely, still more tremulously.... I could hardly stand on my feet.

"Nastenka, Nastenka! It's you!" I heard a voice behind us and at the
same moment the young man took several steps towards us.

My God, how she cried out! How she started! How she tore herself out of
my arms and rushed to meet him! I stood and looked at them, utterly
crushed. But she had hardly given him her hand, had hardly flung herself
into his arms, when she turned to me again, was beside me again in a
flash, and before I knew where I was she threw both arms round my neck
and gave me a warm, tender kiss. Then, without saying a word to me, she
rushed back to him again, took his hand, and drew him after her.

I stood a long time looking after them. At last the two vanished from my
sight.


MORNING

My night ended with the morning. It was a wet day. The rain was falling
and beating disconsolately upon my window pane; it was dark in the room
and grey outside. My head ached and I was giddy; fever was stealing over
my limbs.

"There's a letter for you, sir; the postman brought it," Matrona said
stooping over me.

"A letter? From whom?" I cried jumping up from my chair.

"I don't know, sir, better look--maybe it is written there whom it is
from."

I broke the seal. It was from her!

       *     *     *     *     *

"Oh, forgive me, forgive me! I beg you on my knees to forgive me! I
deceived you and myself. It was a dream, a mirage.... My heart aches for
you to-day; forgive me, forgive me!

"Don't blame me, for I have not changed to you in the least. I told you
that I would love you, I love you now, I more than love you. Oh, my God!
If only I could love you both at once! Oh, if only you were he!"

["Oh, if only he were you," echoed in my mind. I remembered your words,
Nastenka!]

"God knows what I would do for you now! I know that you are sad and
dreary. I have wounded you, but you know when one loves a wrong is soon
forgotten. And you love me.

"Thank you, yes, thank you for that love! For it will live in my memory
like a sweet dream which lingers long after awakening; for I shall
remember for ever that instant when you opened your heart to me like a
brother and so generously accepted the gift of my shattered heart to
care for it, nurse it, and heal it.... If you forgive me, the memory of
you will be exalted by a feeling of everlasting gratitude which will
never be effaced from my soul.... I will treasure that memory: I will be
true to it, I will not betray it, I will not betray my heart: it is too
constant. It returned so quickly yesterday to him to whom it has always
belonged.

"We shall meet, you will come to us, you will not leave us, you will be
for ever a friend, a brother to me. And when you see me you will give me
your hand ... yes? You will give it to me, you have forgiven me, haven't
you? You love me _as before_?

"Oh, love me, do not forsake me, because I love you so at this moment,
because I am worthy of your love, because I will deserve it ... my dear!
Next week I am to be married to him. He has come back in love, he has
never forgotten me. You will not be angry at my writing about him. But I
want to come and see you with him; you will like him, won't you?

          "Forgive me, remember and love your
                        "NASTENKA."

       *     *     *     *     *

I read that letter over and over again for a long time; tears gushed to
my eyes. At last it fell from my hands and I hid my face.

"Dearie! I say, dearie----" Matrona began.

"What is it, Matrona?"

"I have taken all the cobwebs off the ceiling; you can have a wedding or
give a party."

I looked at Matrona. She was still a hearty, _youngish_ old woman, but I
don't know why all at once I suddenly pictured her with lustreless eyes,
a wrinkled face, bent, decrepit.... I don't know why I suddenly pictured
my room grown old like Matrona. The walls and the floors looked
discoloured, everything seemed dingy; the spiders' webs were thicker
than ever. I don't know why, but when I looked out of the window it
seemed to me that the house opposite had grown old and dingy too, that
the stucco on the columns was peeling off and crumbling, that the
cornices were cracked and blackened, and that the walls, of a vivid deep
yellow, were patchy.

Either the sunbeams suddenly peeping out from the clouds for a moment
were hidden again behind a veil of rain, and everything had grown dingy
again before my eyes; or perhaps the whole vista of my future flashed
before me so sad and forbidding, and I saw myself just as I was now,
fifteen years hence, older, in the same room, just as solitary, with the
same Matrona grown no cleverer for those fifteen years.

But to imagine that I should bear you a grudge, Nastenka! That I should
cast a dark cloud over your serene, untroubled happiness; that by my
bitter reproaches I should cause distress to your heart, should poison
it with secret remorse and should force it to throb with anguish at the
moment of bliss; that I should crush a single one of those tender
blossoms which you have twined in your dark tresses when you go with him
to the altar.... Oh never, never! May your sky be clear, may your sweet
smile be bright and untroubled, and may you be blessed for that moment
of blissful happiness which you gave to another, lonely and grateful
heart!

My God, a whole moment of happiness! Is that too little for the whole of
a man's life?




  NOTES FROM UNDERGROUND[1]
  A NOVEL

  PART I
  UNDERGROUND


I

I am a sick man.... I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive man. I
believe my liver is diseased. However, I know nothing at all about my
disease, and do not know for certain what ails me. I don't consult a
doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for medicine and
doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently so to
respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to be
superstitious, but I am superstitious). No, I refuse to consult a doctor
from spite. That you probably will not understand. Well, I understand
it, though. Of course, I can't explain who it is precisely that I am
mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well aware that I
cannot "pay out" the doctors by not consulting them; I know better than
any one that by all this I am only injuring myself and no one else. But
still, if I don't consult a doctor it is from spite. My liver is bad,
well--let it get worse!

    [Footnote 1: The author of the diary and the diary itself
    are, of course, imaginary. Nevertheless it is clear that
    such persons as the writer of these notes not only may, but
    positively must, exist in our society, when we consider the
    circumstances in the midst of which our society is formed. I
    have tried to expose to the view of the public more
    distinctly than is commonly done, one of the characters of
    the recent past. He is one of the representatives of a
    generation still living. In this fragment, entitled
    "Underground," this person introduces himself and his views,
    and, as it were, tries to explain the causes owing to which
    he has made his appearance and was bound to make his
    appearance in our midst. In the second fragment there are
    added the actual notes of this person concerning certain
    events in his life.--AUTHOR'S NOTE.]

I have been going on like that for a long time--twenty years. Now I am
forty. I used to be in the government service, but am no longer. I was a
spiteful official. I was rude and took pleasure in being so. I did not
take bribes, you see, so I was bound to find a recompense in that, at
least. (A poor jest, but I will not scratch it out. I wrote it thinking
it would sound very witty; but now that I have seen myself that I only
wanted to show off in a despicable way, I will not scratch it out on
purpose!)

When petitioners used to come for information to the table at which I
sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and felt intense enjoyment when I
succeeded in making anybody unhappy. I almost always did succeed. For
the most part they were all timid people--of course, they were
petitioners. But of the uppish ones there was one officer in particular
I could not endure. He simply would not be humble, and clanked his sword
in a disgusting way. I carried on a feud with him for eighteen months
over that sword. At last I got the better of him. He left off clanking
it. That happened in my youth, though.

But do you know, gentlemen, what was the chief point about my spite?
Why, the whole point, the real sting of it lay in the fact that
continually, even in the moment of the acutest spleen, I was inwardly
conscious with shame that I was not only not a spiteful but not even an
embittered man, that I was simply scaring sparrows at random and amusing
myself by it. I might foam at the mouth, but bring me a doll to play
with, give me a cup of tea with sugar in it, and maybe I should be
appeased. I might even be genuinely touched, though probably I should
grind my teeth at myself afterwards and lie awake at night with shame
for months after. That was my way.

I was lying when I said just now that I was a spiteful official. I was
lying from spite. I was simply amusing myself with the petitioners and
with the officer, and in reality I never could become spiteful. I was
conscious every moment in myself of many, very many elements absolutely
opposite to that. I felt them positively swarming in me, these opposite
elements. I knew that they had been swarming in me all my life and
craving some outlet from me, but I would not let them, would not let
them, purposely would not let them come out. They tormented me till I
was ashamed: they drove me to convulsions and--sickened me, at last, how
they sickened me! Now, are not you fancying, gentlemen, that I am
expressing remorse for something now, that I am asking your forgiveness
for something? I am sure you are fancying that.... However, I assure you
I do not care if you are....

It was not only that I could not become spiteful, I did not know how to
become anything: neither spiteful nor kind, neither a rascal nor an
honest man, neither a hero nor an insect. Now, I am living out my life
in my corner, taunting myself with the spiteful and useless consolation
that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously, and it is only
the fool who becomes anything. Yes, a man in the nineteenth century must
and morally ought to be pre-eminently a characterless creature; a man of
character, an active man is pre-eminently a limited creature. That is my
conviction of forty years. I am forty years old now, and you know forty
years is a whole life-time; you know it is extreme old age. To live
longer than forty years is bad manners, is vulgar, immoral. Who does
live beyond forty? Answer that, sincerely and honestly. I will tell you
who do: fools and worthless fellows. I tell all old men that to their
face, all these venerable old men, all these silver-haired and reverend
seniors! I tell the whole world that to its face! I have a right to say
so, for I shall go on living to sixty myself. To seventy! To eighty!...
Stay, let me take breath....

You imagine no doubt, gentlemen, that I want to amuse you. You are
mistaken in that, too. I am by no means such a mirthful person as you
imagine, or as you may imagine; however, irritated by all this babble
(and I feel that you are irritated) you think fit to ask me who am
I--then my answer is, I am a collegiate assessor. I was in the service
that I might have something to eat (and solely for that reason), and
when last year a distant relation left me six thousand roubles in his
will I immediately retired from the service and settled down in my
corner. I used to live in this corner before, but now I have settled
down in it. My room is a wretched, horrid one in the outskirts of the
town. My servant is an old country-woman, ill-natured from stupidity,
and, moreover, there is always a nasty smell about her. I am told that
the Petersburg climate is bad for me, and that with my small means it is
very expensive to live in Petersburg. I know all that better than all
these sage and experienced counsellors and monitors.... But I am
remaining in Petersburg; I am not going away from Petersburg! I am not
going away because ... ech! Why, it is absolutely no matter whether I am
going away or not going away.

But what can a decent man speak of with most pleasure?

Answer: Of himself.

Well, so I will talk about myself.


II

I want now to tell you, gentlemen, whether you care to hear it or not,
why I could not even become an insect. I tell you solemnly, that I have
many times tried to become an insect. But I was not equal even to that.
I swear, gentlemen, that to be too conscious is an illness--a real
thorough-going illness. For man's everyday needs, it would have been
quite enough to have the ordinary human consciousness, that is, half or
a quarter of the amount which falls to the lot of a cultivated man of
our unhappy nineteenth century, especially one who has the fatal
ill-luck to inhabit Petersburg, the most theoretical and intentional
town on the whole terrestrial globe. (There are intentional and
unintentional towns.) It would have been quite enough, for instance, to
have the consciousness by which all so-called direct persons and men of
action live. I bet you think I am writing all this from affectation, to
be witty at the expense of men of action; and what is more, that from
ill-bred affectation, I am clanking a sword like my officer. But,
gentlemen, whoever can pride himself on his diseases and even swagger
over them?

Though, after all, every one does do that; people do pride themselves on
their diseases, and I do, may be, more than any one. We will not dispute
it; my contention was absurd. But yet I am firmly persuaded that a great
deal of consciousness, every sort of consciousness, in fact, is a
disease. I stick to that. Let us leave that, too, for a minute. Tell me
this: why does it happen that at the very, yes, at the very moments when
I am most capable of feeling every refinement of all that is "good and
beautiful," as they used to say at one time, it would, as though of
design, happen to me not only to feel but to do such ugly things, such
that.... Well, in short, actions that all, perhaps, commit; but which,
as though purposely, occurred to me at the very time when I was most
conscious that they ought not to be committed. The more conscious I was
of goodness and of all that was "good and beautiful," the more deeply I
sank into my mire and the more ready I was to sink in it altogether. But
the chief point was that all this was, as it were, not accidental in me,
but as though it were bound to be so. It was as though it were my most
normal condition, and not in the least disease or depravity, so that at
last all desire in me to struggle against this depravity passed. It
ended by my almost believing (perhaps actually believing) that this was
perhaps my normal condition. But at first, in the beginning, what
agonies I endured in that struggle! I did not believe it was the same
with other people, and all my life I hid this fact about myself as a
secret. I was ashamed (even now, perhaps, I am ashamed): I got to the
point of feeling a sort of secret abnormal, despicable enjoyment in
returning home to my corner on some disgusting Petersburg night, acutely
conscious that that day I had committed a loathsome action again, that
what was done could never be undone, and secretly, inwardly gnawing,
gnawing at myself for it, tearing and consuming myself till at last the
bitterness turned into a sort of shameful accursed sweetness, and at
last--into positive real enjoyment! Yes, into enjoyment, into enjoyment!
I insist upon that. I have spoken of this because I keep wanting to know
for a fact whether other people feel such enjoyment? I will explain; the
enjoyment was just from the too intense consciousness of one's own
degradation; it was from feeling oneself that one had reached the last
barrier, that it was horrible, but that it could not be otherwise; that
there was no escape for you; that you never could become a different
man; that even if time and faith were still left you to change into
something different you would most likely not wish to change; or if you
did wish to, even then you would do nothing; because perhaps in reality
there was nothing for you to change into.

And the worst of it was, and the root of it all, that it was all in
accord with the normal fundamental laws of over-acute consciousness, and
with the inertia that was the direct result of those laws, and that
consequently one was not only unable to change but could do absolutely
nothing. Thus it would follow, as the result of acute consciousness,
that one is not to blame in being a scoundrel; as though that were any
consolation to the scoundrel once he has come to realize that he
actually is a scoundrel. But enough.... Ech, I have talked a lot of
nonsense, but what have I explained? How is enjoyment in this to be
explained? But I will explain it. I will get to the bottom of it! That
is why I have taken up my pen....

I, for instance, have a great deal of _amour propre_. I am as suspicious
and prone to take offence as a humpback or a dwarf. But upon my word I
sometimes have had moments when if I had happened to be slapped in the
face I should, perhaps, have been positively glad of it. I say, in
earnest, that I should probably have been able to discover even in that
a peculiar sort of enjoyment--the enjoyment, of course, of despair; but
in despair there are the most intense enjoyments, especially when one is
very acutely conscious of the hopelessness of one's position. And when
one is slapped in the face--why then the consciousness of being rubbed
into a pulp would positively overwhelm one. The worst of it is, look at
it which way one will, it still turns out that I was always the most to
blame in everything. And what is most humiliating of all, to blame for
no fault of my own but, so to say, through the laws of nature. In the
first place, to blame because I am cleverer than any of the people
surrounding me. (I have always considered myself cleverer than any of
the people surrounding me, and sometimes, would you believe it, have
been positively ashamed of it. At any rate, I have all my life, as it
were, turned my eyes away and never could look people straight in the
face.) To blame, finally, because even if I had had magnanimity, I
should only have had more suffering from the sense of its uselessness. I
should certainly have never been able to do anything from being
magnanimous--neither to forgive, for my assailant would perhaps have
slapped me from the laws of nature, and one cannot forgive the laws of
nature; nor to forget, for even if it were owing to the laws of nature,
it is insulting all the same. Finally, even if I had wanted to be
anything but magnanimous, had desired on the contrary to revenge myself
on my assailant, I could not have revenged myself on any one for
anything because I should certainly never have made up my mind to do
anything, even if I had been able to. Why should I not have made up my
mind? About that in particular I want to say a few words.


III

With people who know how to revenge themselves and to stand up for
themselves in general, how is it done? Why, when they are possessed, let
us suppose, by the feeling of revenge, then for the time there is
nothing else but that feeling left in their whole being. Such a
gentleman simply dashes straight for his object like an infuriated bull
with its horns down, and nothing but a wall will stop him. (By the way:
facing the wall, such gentlemen--that is, the "direct" persons and men
of action--are genuinely nonplussed. For them a wall is not an evasion,
as for us people who think and consequently do nothing; it is not an
excuse for turning aside, an excuse for which we are always very glad,
though we scarcely believe in it ourselves, as a rule. No, they are
nonplussed in all sincerity. The wall has for them something
tranquillizing, morally soothing, final--maybe even something mysterious
... but of the wall later.)

Well, such a direct person I regard as the real normal man, as his
tender mother nature wished to see him when she graciously brought him
into being on the earth. I envy such a man till I am green in the face.
He is stupid. I am not disputing that, but perhaps the normal man should
be stupid, how do you know? Perhaps it is very beautiful, in fact. And I
am the more persuaded of that suspicion, if one can call it so, by the
fact that if you take, for instance, the antithesis of the normal man,
that is, the man of acute consciousness, who has come, of course, not
out of the lap of nature but out of a retort (this is almost mysticism,
gentlemen, but I suspect this, too), this retort-made man is sometimes
so nonplussed in the presence of his antithesis that with all his
exaggerated consciousness he genuinely thinks of himself as a mouse and
not a man. It may be an acutely conscious mouse, yet it is a mouse,
while the other is a man, and therefore, et cætera, et cætera. And the
worst of it is, he himself, his very own self, looks on himself as a
mouse; no one asks him to do so; and that is an important point. Now let
us look at this mouse in action. Let us suppose, for instance, that it
feels insulted, too (and it almost always does feel insulted), and wants
to revenge itself, too. There may even be a greater accumulation of
spite in it than in _l'homme de la nature et de la vérité_. The base and
nasty desire to vent that spite on its assailant rankles perhaps even
more nastily in it than in _l'homme de la nature et de la vérité_. For
through his innate stupidity the latter looks upon his revenge as
justice pure and simple; while in consequence of his acute consciousness
the mouse does not believe in the justice of it. To come at last to the
deed itself, to the very act of revenge. Apart from the one fundamental
nastiness the luckless mouse succeeds in creating around it so many
other nastinesses in the form of doubts and questions, adds to the one
question so many unsettled questions that there inevitably works up
around it a sort of fatal brew, a stinking mess, made up of its doubts,
emotions, and of the contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action
who stand solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing at it
till their healthy sides ache. Of course the only thing left for it is
to dismiss all that with a wave of its paw, and, with a smile of assumed
contempt in which it does not even itself believe, creep ignominiously
into its mouse-hole. There in its nasty, stinking, underground home our
insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes absorbed in cold,
malignant and, above all, everlasting spite. For forty years together it
will remember its injury down to the smallest, most ignominious details,
and every time will add, of itself, details still more ignominious,
spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own imagination. It
will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but yet it will recall it all,
it will go over and over every detail, it will invent unheard of things
against itself, pretending that those things might happen, and will
forgive nothing. Maybe it will begin to revenge itself, too, but, as it
were, piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind the stove, incognito,
without believing either in its own right to vengeance, or in the
success of its revenge, knowing that from all its efforts at revenge it
will suffer a hundred times more than he on whom it revenges itself,
while he, I daresay, will not even scratch himself. On its deathbed it
will recall it all over again, with interest accumulated over all the
years and....

But it is just in that cold, abominable half despair, half belief, in
that conscious burying oneself alive for grief in the underworld for
forty years, in that acutely recognized and yet partly doubtful
hopelessness of one's position, in that hell of unsatisfied desires
turned inward, in that fever of oscillations, of resolutions determined
for ever and repented of again a minute later--that the savour of that
strange enjoyment of which I have spoken lies. It is so subtle, so
difficult of analysis, that persons who are a little limited, or even
simply persons of strong nerves, will not understand a single atom of
it. "Possibly," you will add on your own account with a grin, "people
will not understand it either who have never received a slap in the
face," and in that way you will politely hint to me that I, too,
perhaps, have had the experience of a slap in the face in my life, and
so I speak as one who knows. I bet that you are thinking that. But set
your minds at rest, gentlemen, I have not received a slap in the face,
though it is absolutely a matter of indifference to me what you may
think about it. Possibly, I even regret, myself, that I have given so
few slaps in the face during my life. But enough ... not another word on
that subject of such extreme interest to you.

I will continue calmly concerning persons with strong nerves who do not
understand a certain refinement of enjoyment. Though in certain
circumstances these gentlemen bellow their loudest like bulls, though
this, let us suppose, does them the greatest credit, yet, as I have said
already, confronted with the impossible they subside at once. The
impossible means the stone wall! What stone wall? Why, of course, the
laws of nature, the deductions of natural science, mathematics. As soon
as they prove to you, for instance, that you are descended from a
monkey, then it is no use scowling, accept it for a fact. When they
prove to you that in reality one drop of your own fat must be dearer to
you than a hundred thousand of your fellow creatures, and that this
conclusion is the final solution of all so-called virtues and duties and
all such prejudices and fancies, then you have just to accept it, there
is no help for it, for twice two is a law of mathematics. Just try
refuting it.

"Upon my word, they will shout at you, it is no use protesting: it is a
case of twice two makes four! Nature does not ask your permission, she
has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws or
dislike them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently
all her conclusions. A wall, you see, is a wall ... and so on, and so
on."

Merciful Heavens! but what do I care for the laws of nature and
arithmetic, when, for some reason I dislike those laws and the fact that
twice two makes four? Of course I cannot break through the wall by
battering my head against it if I really have not the strength to knock
it down, but I am not going to be reconciled to it simply because it is
a stone wall and I have not the strength.

As though such a stone wall really were a consolation, and really did
contain some word of conciliation, simply because it is as true as twice
two makes four. Oh, absurdity of absurdities! How much better it is to
understand it all, to recognize it all, all the impossibilities and the
stone wall; not to be reconciled to one of those impossibilities and
stone walls if it disgusts you to be reconciled to it; by the way of the
most inevitable, logical combinations to reach the most revolting
conclusions on the everlasting theme, that even for the stone wall you
are yourself somehow to blame, though again it is as clear as day you
are not to blame in the least, and therefore grinding your teeth in
silent impotence to sink into luxurious inertia, brooding on the fact
that there is no one even for you to feel vindictive against, that you
have not, and perhaps never will have, an object for your spite, that it
is a sleight of hand, a bit of juggling, a card-sharper's trick, that it
is simply a mess, no knowing what and no knowing who, but in spite of
all these uncertainties and jugglings, still there is an ache in you,
and the more you do not know, the worse the ache.


IV

"Ha, ha, ha! You will be finding enjoyment in toothache next," you cry,
with a laugh.

"Well? Even in toothache there is enjoyment," I answer. I had toothache
for a whole month and I know there is. In that case, of course, people
are not spiteful in silence, but moan; but they are not candid moans,
they are malignant moans, and the malignancy is the whole point. The
enjoyment of the sufferer finds expression in those moans; if he did not
feel enjoyment in them he would not moan. It is a good example,
gentlemen, and I will develop it. Those moans express in the first place
all the aimlessness of your pain, which is so humiliating to your
consciousness; the whole legal system of nature on which you spit
disdainfully, of course, but from which you suffer all the same while
she does not. They express the consciousness that you have no enemy to
punish, but that you have pain; the consciousness that in spite of all
possible Vagenheims you are in complete slavery to your teeth; that if
some one wishes it, your teeth will leave off aching, and if he does
not, they will go on aching another three months; and that finally if
you are still contumacious and still protest, all that is left you for
your own gratification is to thrash yourself or beat your wall with your
fist as hard as you can, and absolutely nothing more. Well, these mortal
insults, these jeers on the part of some one unknown, end at last in an
enjoyment which sometimes reaches the highest degree of voluptuousness.
I ask you, gentlemen, listen sometimes to the moans of an educated man
of the nineteenth century suffering from toothache, on the second or
third day of the attack, when he is beginning to moan, not as he moaned
on the first day, that is, not simply because he has toothache, not just
as any coarse peasant, but as a man affected by progress and European
civilization, a man who is "divorced from the soil and the national
elements," as they express it now-a-days. His moans become nasty,
disgustingly malignant, and go on for whole days and nights. And of
course he knows himself that he is doing himself no sort of good with
his moans; he knows better than any one that he is only lacerating and
harassing himself and others for nothing; he knows that even the
audience before whom he is making his efforts, and his whole family,
listen to him with loathing, do not put a ha'porth of faith in him, and
inwardly understand that he might moan differently, more simply, without
trills and flourishes, and that he is only amusing himself like that
from ill-humour, from malignancy. Well, in all these recognitions and
disgraces it is that there lies a voluptuous pleasure. As though he
would say: "I am worrying you, I am lacerating your hearts, I am keeping
every one in the house awake. Well, stay awake then, you, too, feel
every minute that I have toothache. I am not a hero to you now, as I
tried to seem before, but simply a nasty person, an impostor. Well, so
be it, then! I am very glad that you see through me. It is nasty for you
to hear my despicable moans: well, let it be nasty; here I will let you
have a nastier flourish in a minute...." You do not understand even now,
gentlemen? No, it seems our development and our consciousness must go
further to understand all the intricacies of this pleasure. You laugh?
Delighted. My jests, gentlemen, are of course in bad taste, jerky,
involved, lacking self-confidence. But of course that is because I do
not respect myself. Can a man of perception respect himself at all?


V

Come, can a man who attempts to find enjoyment in the very feeling of
his own degradation possibly have a spark of respect for himself? I am
not saying this now from any mawkish kind of remorse. And, indeed, I
could never endure saying, "Forgive me, Papa, I won't do it again," not
because I am incapable of saying that--on the contrary, perhaps just
because I have been too capable of it, and in what a way, too! As though
of design I used to get into trouble in cases when I was not to blame in
any way. That was the nastiest part of it. At the same time I was
genuinely touched and penitent, I used to shed tears and, of course,
deceived myself, though I was not acting in the least and there was a
sick feeling in my heart at the time.... For that one could not blame
even the laws of nature, though the laws of nature have continually all
my life offended me more than anything. It is loathsome to remember it
all, but it was loathsome even then. Of course, a minute or so later I
would realize wrathfully that it was all a lie, a revolting lie, an
affected lie, that is, all this penitence, this emotion, these vows of
reform. You will ask why did I worry myself with such antics: answer,
because it was very dull to sit with one's hands folded, and so one
began cutting capers. That is really it. Observe yourselves more
carefully, gentlemen, then you will understand that it is so. I invented
adventures for myself and made up a life, so as at least to live in some
way. How many times it has happened to me--well, for instance, to take
offence simply on purpose, for nothing; and one knows oneself, of
course, that one is offended at nothing, that one is putting it on, but
yet one brings oneself, at last to the point of being really offended.
All my life I have had an impulse to play such pranks, so that in the
end I could not control it in myself. Another time, twice, in fact, I
tried hard to be in love. I suffered, too, gentlemen, I assure you. In
the depth of my heart there was no faith in my suffering, only a faint
stir of mockery, but yet I did suffer, and in the real, orthodox way; I
was jealous, beside myself ... and it was all from _ennui_, gentlemen,
all from _ennui_; inertia overcame me. You know the direct, legitimate
fruit of consciousness is inertia, that is, conscious
sitting-with-the-hands-folded. I have referred to this already. I
repeat, I repeat with emphasis: all "direct" persons and men of action
are active just because they are stupid and limited. How explain that? I
will tell you: in consequence of their limitation they take immediate
and secondary causes for primary ones, and in that way persuade
themselves more quickly and easily than other people do that they have
found an infallible foundation for their activity, and their minds are
at ease and you know that is the chief thing. To begin to act, you know,
you must first have your mind completely at ease and no trace of doubt
left in it. Why, how am I, for example to set my mind at rest? Where are
the primary causes on which I am to build? Where are my foundations?
Where am I to get them from? I exercise myself in reflection, and
consequently with me every primary cause at once draws after itself
another still more primary, and so on to infinity. That is just the
essence of every sort of consciousness and reflection. It must be a case
of the laws of nature again. What is the result of it in the end? Why,
just the same. Remember I spoke just now of vengeance. (I am sure you
did not take it in.) I said that a man revenges himself because he sees
justice in it. Therefore he has found a primary cause, that is, justice.
And so he is at rest on all sides, and consequently he carries out his
revenge calmly and successfully, being persuaded that he is doing a just
and honest thing. But I see no justice in it, I find no sort of virtue
in it either, and consequently if I attempt to revenge myself, it is
only out of spite. Spite, of course, might overcome everything, all my
doubts, and so might serve quite successfully in place of a primary
cause, precisely because it is not a cause. But what is to be done if I
have not even spite (I began with that just now, you know)? In
consequence again of those accursed laws of consciousness, anger in me
is subject to chemical disintegration. You look into it, the object
flies off into air, your reasons evaporate, the criminal is not to be
found, the wrong becomes not a wrong but a phantom, something like the
toothache, for which no one is to blame, and consequently there is only
the same outlet left again--that is, to beat the wall as hard as you
can. So you give it up with a wave of the hand because you have not
found a fundamental cause. And try letting yourself be carried away by
your feelings, blindly, without reflection, without a primary cause,
repelling consciousness at least for a time; hate or love, if only not
to sit with your hands folded. The day after to-morrow, at the latest,
you will begin despising yourself for having knowingly deceived
yourself. Result: a soap-bubble and inertia. Oh, gentlemen, do you know,
perhaps I consider myself an intelligent man, only because all my life I
have been able neither to begin nor to finish anything. Granted I am a
babbler, a harmless vexatious babbler, like all of us. But what is to be
done if the direct and sole vocation of every intelligent man is babble,
that is, the intentional pouring of water through a sieve?


VI

Oh, if I had done nothing simply from laziness! Heavens, how I should
have respected myself, then. I should have respected myself because I
should at least have been capable of being lazy; there would at least
have been one quality, as it were, positive in me, in which I could have
believed myself. Question: What is he? Answer: A sluggard; how very
pleasant it would have been to hear that of oneself! It would mean that
I was positively defined, it would mean that there was something to say
about me. "Sluggard"--why, it is a calling and vocation, it is a career.
Do not jest, it is so. I should then be a member of the best club by
right, and should find my occupation in continually respecting myself. I
knew a gentleman who prided himself all his life on being a connoisseur
of Lafitte. He considered this as his positive virtue, and never doubted
himself. He died, not simply with a tranquil, but with a triumphant,
conscience, and he was quite right, too. Then I should have chosen a
career for myself, I should have been a sluggard and a glutton, not a
simple one, but, for instance, one with sympathies for everything good
and beautiful. How do you like that? I have long had visions of it. That
"good and beautiful" weighs heavily on my mind at forty. But that is at
forty; then--oh, then it would have been different! I should have found
for myself a form of activity in keeping with it, to be precise,
drinking to the health of everything "good and beautiful." I should have
snatched at every opportunity to drop a tear into my glass and then to
drain it to all that is "good and beautiful." I should then have turned
everything into the good and the beautiful; in the nastiest,
unquestionable trash, I should have sought out the good and the
beautiful. I should have exuded tears like a wet sponge. An artist, for
instance, paints a picture worthy of Gay. At once I drink to the health
of the artist who painted the picture worthy of Gay, because I love all
that is "good and beautiful." An author has written _As you will_: at
once I drink to the health of "any one you will" because I love all that
is "good and beautiful."

I should claim respect for doing so. I should persecute any one who
would not show me respect. I should live at ease, I should die with
dignity, why, it is charming, perfectly charming! And what a good round
belly I should have grown, what a treble chin I should have established,
what a ruby nose I should have coloured for myself, so that every one
would have said, looking at me: "Here is an asset! Here is something
real and solid!" And, say what you like, it is very agreeable to hear
such remarks about oneself in this negative age.


VII

But these are all golden dreams. Oh, tell me, who was it first
announced, who was it first proclaimed, that man only does nasty things
because he does not know his own interests; and that if he were
enlightened, if his eyes were opened to his real normal interests, man
would at once cease to do nasty things, would at once become good and
noble because, being enlightened and understanding his real advantage,
he would see his own advantage in the good and nothing else, and we all
know that not one man can, consciously, act against his own interests,
consequently, so to say, through necessity, he would begin doing good?
Oh, the babe! Oh, the pure, innocent child! Why, in the first place,
when in all these thousands of years has there been a time when man has
acted only from his own interest? What is to be done with the millions
of facts that bear witness that men, _consciously_, that is fully
understanding their real interests, have left them in the background and
have rushed headlong on another path, to meet peril and danger,
compelled to this course by nobody and by nothing, but, as it were,
simply disliking the beaten track, and have obstinately, wilfully,
struck out another difficult, absurd way, seeking it almost in the
darkness. So, I suppose, this obstinacy and perversity were pleasanter
to them than any advantage.... Advantage! What is advantage? And will
you take it upon yourself to define with perfect accuracy in what the
advantage of man consists? And what if it so happens that a man's
advantage, _sometimes_, not only may, but even must, consist in his
desiring in certain cases what is harmful to himself and not
advantageous? And if so, if there can be such a case, the whole
principle falls into dust. What do you think--are there such cases? You
laugh; laugh away, gentlemen, but only answer me: have man's advantages
been reckoned up with perfect certainty? Are there not some which not
only have not been included but cannot possibly be included under any
classification? You see, you gentlemen have, to the best of my
knowledge, taken your whole register of human advantages from the
averages of statistical figures and politico-economical formulas. Your
advantages are prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace--and so on, and so on.
So that the man who should, for instance, go openly and knowingly in
opposition to all that list would, to your thinking, and indeed mine,
too, of course, be an obscurantist or an absolute madman: would not he?
But, you know, this is what is surprising: why does it so happen that
all these statisticians, sages and lovers of humanity, when they reckon
up human advantages invariably leave out one? They don't even take it
into their reckoning in the form in which it should be taken, and the
whole reckoning depends upon that. It would be no great matter, they
would simply have to take it, this advantage, and add it to the list.
But the trouble is, that this strange advantage does not fall under any
classification and is not in place in any list. I have a friend for
instance.... Ech! gentlemen, but of course he is your friend, too; and
indeed there is no one, no one, to whom he is not a friend! When he
prepares for any undertaking this gentleman immediately explains to you,
elegantly and clearly, exactly how he must act in accordance with the
laws of reason and truth. What is more, he will talk to you with
excitement and passion of the true normal interests of man; with irony
he will upbraid the shortsighted fools who do not understand their own
interests, nor the true significance of virtue; and, within a quarter of
an hour, without any sudden outside provocation, but simply through
something inside him which is stronger than all his interests, he will
go off on quite a different tack--that is, act in direct opposition to
what he has just been saying about himself, in opposition to the laws of
reason, in opposition to his own advantage, in fact in opposition to
everything.... I warn you that my friend is a compound personality, and
therefore it is difficult to blame him as an individual. The fact is,
gentlemen, it seems there must really exist something that is dearer to
almost every man than his greatest advantages, or (not to be illogical)
there is a most advantageous advantage (the very one omitted of which we
spoke just now) which is more important and more advantageous than all
other advantages, for the sake of which a man if necessary is ready to
act in opposition to all laws; that is, in opposition to reason, honour,
peace, prosperity--in fact, in opposition to all those excellent and
useful things if only he can attain that fundamental, most advantageous
advantage which is dearer to him than all. "Yes, but it's advantage all
the same" you will retort. But excuse me, I'll make the point clear, and
it is not a case of playing upon words. What matters is, that this
advantage is remarkable from the very fact that it breaks down all our
classifications, and continually shatters every system constructed by
lovers of mankind for the benefit of mankind. In fact, it upsets
everything. But before I mention this advantage to you, I want to
compromise myself personally, and therefore I boldly declare that all
these fine systems, all these theories for explaining to mankind their
real normal interests, in order that inevitably striving to pursue these
interests they may at once become good and noble--are, in my opinion, so
far, mere logical exercises! Yes, logical exercises. Why, to maintain
this theory of the regeneration of mankind by means of the pursuit of
his own advantage is to my mind almost the same thing as ... as to
affirm, for instance, following Buckle, that through civilization
mankind becomes softer, and consequently less bloodthirsty and less
fitted for warfare. Logically it does seem to follow from his arguments.
But man has such a predilection for systems and abstract deductions that
he is ready to distort the truth intentionally, he is ready to deny the
evidence of his senses only to justify his logic. I take this example
because it is the most glaring instance of it. Only look about you:
blood is being spilt in streams, and in the merriest way, as though it
were champagne. Take the whole of the nineteenth century in which Buckle
lived. Take Napoleon--the Great and also the present one. Take North
America--the eternal union. Take the farce of Schleswig-Holstein.... And
what is it that civilization softens in us? The only gain of
civilization for mankind is the greater capacity for variety of
sensations--and absolutely nothing more. And through the development of
this many-sidedness man may come to finding enjoyment in bloodshed. In
fact, this has already happened to him. Have you noticed that it is the
most civilized gentlemen who have been the subtlest slaughterers, to
whom the Attilas and Stenka Razins could not hold a candle, and if they
are not so conspicuous as the Attilas and Stenka Razins it is simply
because they are so often met with, are so ordinary and have become so
familiar to us. In any case civilization has made mankind if not more
bloodthirsty, at least more vilely, more loathsomely bloodthirsty. In
old days he saw justice in bloodshed and with his conscience at peace
exterminated those he thought proper. Now we do think bloodshed
abominable and yet we engage in this abomination, and with more energy
than ever. Which is worse? Decide that for yourselves. They say that
Cleopatra (excuse an instance from Roman history) was fond of sticking
gold pins into her slave-girls' breasts and derived gratification from
their screams and writhings. You will say that that was in the
comparatively barbarous times; that these are barbarous times too,
because also, comparatively speaking, pins are stuck in even now; that
though man has now learned to see more clearly than in barbarous ages,
he is still far from having learnt to act as reason and science would
dictate. But yet you are fully convinced that he will be sure to learn
when he gets rid of certain old bad habits, and when common sense and
science have completely re-educated human nature and turned it in a
normal direction. You are confident that then man will cease from
_intentional_ error and will, so to say, be compelled not to want to set
his will against his normal interests. That is not all; then, you say,
science itself will teach man (though to my mind it's a superfluous
luxury) that he never has really had any caprice or will of his own, and
that he himself is something of the nature of a piano-key or the stop of
an organ, and that there are, besides, things called the laws of nature;
so that everything he does is not done by his willing it, but is done of
itself, by the laws of nature. Consequently we have only to discover
these laws of nature, and man will no longer have to answer for his
actions and life will become exceedingly easy for him. All human actions
will then, of course, be tabulated according to these laws,
mathematically, like tables of logarithms up to 108,000, and entered in
an index; or, better still, there would be published certain edifying
works of the nature of encyclopædic lexicons, in which everything will
be so clearly calculated and explained that there will be no more
incidents or adventures in the world.

Then--this is all what you say--new economic relations will be
established, all ready-made and worked out with mathematical exactitude,
so that every possible question will vanish in the twinkling of an eye,
simply because every possible answer to it will be provided. Then the
"Palace of Crystal" will be built. Then.... In fact, those will be
halcyon days. Of course there is no guaranteeing (this is my comment)
that it will not be, for instance, frightfully dull then (for what will
one have to do when everything will be calculated and tabulated?), but on
the other hand everything will be extraordinarily rational. Of course
boredom may lead you to anything. It is boredom sets one sticking golden
pins into people, but all that would not matter. What is bad (this is my
comment again) is that I dare say people will be thankful for the gold
pins then. Man is stupid, you know, phenomenally stupid; or rather he is
not at all stupid, but he is so ungrateful that you could not find
another like him in all creation. I, for instance, would not be in the
least surprised if all of a sudden, _à propos_ of nothing, in the midst
of general prosperity a gentleman with an ignoble, or rather with a
reactionary and ironical, countenance were to arise and, putting his
arms akimbo, say to us all: "I say, gentlemen, hadn't we better kick
over the whole show and scatter rationalism to the winds, simply to send
these logarithms to the devil, and to enable us to live once more at our
own sweet foolish will!" That again would not matter; but what is
annoying is that he would be sure to find followers--such is the nature
of man. And all that for the most foolish reason, which, one would
think, was hardly worth mentioning: that is, that man everywhere and at
all times, whoever he may be, has preferred to act as he chose and not
in the least as his reason and advantage dictated. And one may choose
what is contrary to one's own interests, and sometimes one _positively
ought_ (that is my idea). One's own free unfettered choice, one's own
caprice, however wild it may be, one's own fancy worked up at times to
frenzy--is that very "most advantageous advantage" which we have
overlooked, which comes under no classification and against which all
systems and theories are continually being shattered to atoms. And how
do these wiseacres know that man wants a normal, a virtuous choice? What
has made them conceive that man must want a rationally advantageous
choice? What man wants is simply _independent_ choice, whatever that
independence may cost and wherever it may lead. And choice, of course,
the devil only knows what choice....


VIII

"Ha! ha! ha! But you know there is no such thing as choice in reality,
say what you like," you will interpose with a chuckle. "Science has
succeeded in so far analysing man that we know already that choice and
what is called freedom of will is nothing else than----"

Stay, gentlemen, I meant to begin with that myself. I confess, I was
rather frightened. I was just going to say that the devil only knows
what choice depends on, and that perhaps that was a very good thing, but
I remembered the teaching of science ... and pulled myself up. And here
you have begun upon it. Indeed, if there really is some day discovered a
formula for all our desires and caprices--that is, an explanation of
what they depend upon, by what laws they arise, how they develop, what
they are aiming at in one case and in another and so on, that is a real
mathematical formula--then, most likely, man will at once cease to feel
desire, indeed, he will be certain to. For who would want to choose by
rule? Besides, he will at once be transformed from a human being into an
organ-stop or something of the sort; for what is a man without desires,
without free will and without choice, if not a stop in an organ? What do
you think? Let us reckon the chances--can such a thing happen or not?

"H'm!" you decide. "Our choice is usually mistaken from a false view of
our advantage. We sometimes choose absolute nonsense because in our
foolishness we see in that nonsense the easiest means for attaining a
supposed advantage. But when all that is explained and worked out on
paper (which is perfectly possible, for it is contemptible and senseless
to suppose that some laws of nature man will never understand), then
certainly so-called desires will no longer exist. For if a desire should
come into conflict with reason we shall then reason and not desire,
because it will be impossible retaining our reason to be _senseless_ in
our desires, and in that way knowingly act against reason and desire to
injure ourselves. And as all choice and reasoning can be really
calculated--because there will some day be discovered the laws of our
so-called free will--so, joking apart, there may one day be something
like a table constructed of them, so that we really shall choose in
accordance with it. If, for instance, some day they calculate and prove
to me that I made a long nose at some one because I could not help
making a long nose at him and that I had to do it in that particular
way, what _freedom_ is left me, especially if I am a learned man and
have taken my degree somewhere? Then I should be able to calculate my
whole life for thirty years beforehand. In short, if this could be
arranged there would be nothing left for us to do; anyway, we should
have to understand that. And, in fact, we ought unwearyingly to repeat
to ourselves that at such and such a time and in such and such
circumstances nature does not ask our leave; that we have got to take
her as she is and not fashion her to suit our fancy, and if we really
aspire to formulas and tables of rules, and well, even ... to the
chemical retort, there's no help for it, we must accept the retort too,
or else it will be accepted without our consent...."

Yes, but here I come to a stop! Gentlemen, you must excuse me for being
over-philosophical; it's the result of forty years underground! Allow me
to indulge my fancy. You see, gentlemen, reason is an excellent thing,
there's no disputing that, but reason is nothing but reason and
satisfies only the rational side of man's nature, while will is a
manifestation of the whole life, that is, of the whole human life
including reason and all the impulses. And although our life, in this
manifestation of it, is often worthless, yet it is life and not simply
extracting square roots. Here I, for instance, quite naturally want to
live, in order to satisfy all my capacities for life, and not simply my
capacity for reasoning, that is, not simply one twentieth of my capacity
for life. What does reason know? Reason only knows what it has succeeded
in learning (some things, perhaps, it will never learn; this is a poor
comfort, but why not say so frankly?) and human nature acts as a whole,
with everything that is in it, consciously or unconsciously, and, even
if it goes wrong, it lives. I suspect, gentlemen, that you are looking
at me with compassion; you tell me again that an enlightened and
developed man, such, in short, as the future man will be, cannot
consciously desire anything disadvantageous to himself, that that can be
proved mathematically. I thoroughly agree, it can--by mathematics. But I
repeat for the hundredth time, there is one case, one only, when man may
consciously, purposely, desire what is injurious to himself, what is
stupid, very stupid--simply in order to have the right to desire for
himself even what is very stupid and not to be bound by an obligation to
desire only what is sensible. Of course, this very stupid thing, this
caprice of ours, may be in reality, gentlemen, more advantageous for us
than anything else on earth, especially in certain cases. And in
particular it may be more advantageous than any advantage even when it
does us obvious harm, and contradicts the soundest conclusions of our
reason concerning our advantage--for in any circumstances it preserves
for us what is most precious and most important--that is, our
personality, our individuality. Some, you see, maintain that this really
is the most precious thing for mankind; choice can, of course, if it
chooses, be in agreement with reason; and especially if this be not
abused but kept within bounds. It is profitable and sometimes even
praiseworthy. But very often, and even most often, choice is utterly and
stubbornly opposed to reason ... and ... and ... do you know that that,
too, is profitable, sometimes even praiseworthy? Gentlemen, let us
suppose that man is not stupid. (Indeed one cannot refuse to suppose
that, if only from the one consideration, that, if man is stupid, then
who is wise?) But if he is not stupid, he is monstrously ungrateful!
Phenomenally ungrateful. In fact, I believe that the best definition of
man is the ungrateful biped. But that is not all, that is not his worst
defect; his worst defect is his perpetual moral obliquity,
perpetual--from the days of the Flood to the Schleswig-Holstein period.
Moral obliquity and consequently lack of good sense; for it has long
been accepted that lack of good sense is due to no other cause than
moral obliquity. Put it to the test and cast your eyes upon the history
of mankind. What will you see? Is it a grand spectacle? Grand, if you
like. Take the Colossus of Rhodes, for instance, that's worth something.
With good reason Mr. Anaevsky testifies of it that some say that it is
the work of man's hands, while others maintain that it has been created
by nature herself. Is it many-coloured? May be it is many-coloured, too:
if one takes the dress uniforms, military and civilian, of all peoples
in all ages--that alone is worth something, and if you take the undress
uniforms you will never get to the end of it; no historian would be
equal to the job. Is it monotonous? May be it's monotonous too: it's
fighting and fighting; they are fighting now, they fought first and they
fought last--you will admit, that it is almost too monotonous. In short,
one may say anything about the history of the world--anything that might
enter the most disordered imagination. The only thing one can't say is
that it's rational. The very word sticks in one's throat. And, indeed,
this is the odd thing that is continually happening: there are
continually turning up in life moral and rational persons, sages and
lovers of humanity who make it their object to live all their lives as
morally and rationally as possible, to be, so to speak, a light to their
neighbours simply in order to show them that it is possible to live
morally and rationally in this world. And yet we all know that those
very people sooner or later have been false to themselves, playing some
queer trick, often a most unseemly one. Now I ask you: what can be
expected of man since he is a being endowed with such strange qualities?
Shower upon him every earthly blessing, drown him in a sea of happiness,
so that nothing but bubbles of bliss can be seen on the surface; give
him economic prosperity, such that he should have nothing else to do but
sleep, eat cakes and busy himself with the continuation of his species,
and even then out of sheer ingratitude, sheer spite, man would play you
some nasty trick. He would even risk his cakes and would deliberately
desire the most fatal rubbish, the most uneconomical absurdity, simply
to introduce into all this positive good sense his fatal fantastic
element. It is just his fantastic dreams, his vulgar folly that he will
desire to retain, simply in order to prove to himself--as though that
were so necessary--that men still are men and not the keys of a piano,
which the laws of nature threaten to control so completely that soon one
will be able to desire nothing but by the calendar. And that is not all:
even if man really were nothing but a piano-key, even if this were
proved to him by natural science and mathematics, even then he would not
become reasonable, but would purposely do something perverse out of
simple ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if he does not find
means he will contrive destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings
of all sorts, only to gain his point! He will launch a curse upon the
world, and as only man can curse (it is his privilege, the primary
distinction between him and other animals), may be by his curse alone he
will attain his object--that is, convince himself that he is a man and
not a piano-key! If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and
tabulated--chaos and darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility
of calculating it all beforehand would stop it all, and reason would
reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid of
reason and gain his point! I believe in it, I answer for it, for the
whole work of man really seems to consist in nothing but proving to
himself every minute that he is a man and not a piano-key! It may be at
the cost of his skin, it may be by cannibalism! And this being so, can
one help being tempted to rejoice that it has not yet come off, and that
desire still depends on something we don't know?

You will scream at me (that is, if you condescend to do so) that no one
is touching my free will, that all they are concerned with is that my
will should of itself, of its own free will, coincide with my own normal
interests, with the laws of nature and arithmetic.

Good Heavens, gentlemen, what sort of free will is left when we come to
tabulation and arithmetic, when it will all be a case of twice two make
four? Twice two makes four without my will. As if free will meant that!


IX

Gentlemen, I am joking, and I know myself that my jokes are not
brilliant, but you know one can't take everything as a joke. I am,
perhaps, jesting against the grain. Gentlemen, I am tormented by
questions; answer them for me. You, for instance, want to cure men of
their old habits and reform their will in accordance with science and
good sense. But how do you know, not only that it is possible, but also
that it is _desirable_, to reform man in that way? And what leads you to
the conclusion that man's inclinations _need_ reforming? In short, how
do you know that such a reformation will be a benefit to man? And to go
to the root of the matter, why are you so positively convinced that not
to act against his real normal interests guaranteed by the conclusions
of reason and arithmetic is certainly always advantageous for man and
must always be a law for mankind? So far, you know, this is only your
supposition. It may be the law of logic, but not the law of humanity.
You think, gentlemen, perhaps that I am mad? Allow me to defend myself.
I agree that man is pre-eminently a creative animal, predestined to
strive consciously for an object and to engage in engineering--that is,
incessantly and eternally to make new roads, _wherever they may lead_.
But the reason why he wants sometimes to go off at a tangent may just be
that he is _predestined_ to make the road, and perhaps, too, that
however stupid the "direct" practical man may be, the thought sometimes
will occur to him that the road almost always does lead _somewhere_, and
that the destination it leads to is less important than the process of
making it, and that the chief thing is to save the well-conducted child
from despising engineering, and so giving way to the fatal idleness,
which, as we all know, is the mother of all the vices. Man likes to make
roads and to create, that is a fact beyond dispute. But why has he such
a passionate love for destruction and chaos also? Tell me that! But on
that point I want to say a couple of words myself. May it not be that he
loves chaos and destruction (there can be no disputing that he does
sometimes love it) because he is instinctively afraid of attaining his
object and completing the edifice he is constructing? Who knows, perhaps
he only loves that edifice from a distance, and is by no means in love
with it at close quarters; perhaps he only loves building it and does
not want to live in it, but will leave it, when completed, for the use
of _les animaux domestiques_--such as the ants, the sheep, and so on.
Now the ants have quite a different taste. They have a marvellous
edifice of that pattern which endures for ever--the ant-heap.

With the ant-heap the respectable race of ants began and with the
ant-heap they will probably end, which does the greatest credit to their
perseverance and good sense. But man is a frivolous and incongruous
creature, and perhaps, like a chess player, loves the process of the
game, not the end of it. And who knows (there is no saying with
certainty), perhaps the only goal on earth to which mankind is striving
lies in this incessant process of attaining, in other words, in life
itself, and not in the thing to be attained, which must always be
expressed as a formula, as positive as twice two makes four, and such
positiveness is not life, gentlemen, but is the beginning of death.
Anyway, man has always been afraid of this mathematical certainty, and I
am afraid of it now. Granted that man does nothing but seek that
mathematical certainty, he traverses oceans, sacrifices his life in the
quest, but to succeed, really to find it, he dreads, I assure you. He
feels that when he has found it there will be nothing for him to look
for. When workmen have finished their work they do at least receive
their pay, they go to the tavern, then they are taken to the
police-station--and there is occupation for a week. But where can man
go? Anyway, one can observe a certain awkwardness about him when he has
attained such objects. He loves the process of attaining, but does not
quite like to have attained, and that, of course, is very absurd. In
fact, man is a comical creature; there seems to be a kind of jest in it
all. But yet mathematical certainty is, after all, something
insufferable. Twice two makes four seems to me simply a piece of
insolence. Twice two makes four is a pert coxcomb who stands with arms
akimbo barring your path and spitting. I admit that twice two makes four
is an excellent thing, but if we are to give everything its due, twice
two makes five is sometimes a very charming thing too.

And why are you so firmly, so triumphantly, convinced that only the
normal and the positive--in other words, only what is conducive to
welfare--is for the advantage of man? Is not reason in error as regards
advantage? Does not man, perhaps, love something besides well-being?
Perhaps he is just as fond of suffering? Perhaps suffering is just as
great a benefit to him as well-being? Man is sometimes extraordinarily,
passionately, in love with suffering, and that is a fact. There is no
need to appeal to universal history to prove that; only ask yourself, if
you are a man and have lived at all. As far as my personal opinion is
concerned, to care only for well-being seems to me positively ill-bred.
Whether it's good or bad, it is sometimes very pleasant, too, to smash
things. I hold no brief for suffering nor for well-being either. I am
standing for ... my caprice, and for its being guaranteed to me when
necessary. Suffering would be out of place in vaudevilles, for instance;
I know that. In the "Palace of Crystal" it is unthinkable; suffering
means doubt, negation, and what would be the good of a "palace of
crystal" if there could be any doubt about it? And yet I think man will
never renounce real suffering, that is, destruction and chaos. Why,
suffering is the sole origin of consciousness. Though I did lay it down
at the beginning that consciousness is the greatest misfortune for man,
yet I know man prizes it and would not give it up for any satisfaction.
Consciousness, for instance, is infinitely superior to twice two makes
four. Once you have mathematical certainty there is nothing left to do
or to understand. There will be nothing left but to bottle up your five
senses and plunge into contemplation. While if you stick to
consciousness, even though the same result is attained, you can at least
flog yourself at times, and that will, at any rate, liven you up.
Reactionary as it is, corporal punishment is better than nothing.


X

You believe in a palace of crystal that can never be destroyed--a palace
at which one will not be able to put out one's tongue or make a long
nose on the sly. And perhaps that is just why I am afraid of this
edifice, that it is of crystal and can never be destroyed and that one
cannot put one's tongue out at it even on the sly.

You see, if it were not a palace, but a hen-house, I might creep into it
to avoid getting wet, and yet I would not call the hen-house a palace
out of gratitude to it for keeping me dry. You laugh and say that in
such circumstances a hen-house is as good as a mansion. Yes, I answer,
if one had to live simply to keep out of the rain.

But what is to be done if I have taken it into my head that that is not
the only object in life, and that if one must live one had better live
in a mansion. That is my choice, my desire. You will only eradicate it
when you have changed my preference. Well, do change it, allure me with
something else, give me another ideal. But meanwhile I will not take a
hen-house for a mansion. The palace of crystal may be an idle dream, it
may be that it is inconsistent with the laws of nature and that I have
invented it only through my own stupidity, through the old-fashioned
irrational habits of my generation. But what does it matter to me that
it is inconsistent? That makes no difference since it exists in my
desires, or rather exists as long as my desires exist. Perhaps you are
laughing again? Laugh away; I will put up with any mockery rather than
pretend that I am satisfied when I am hungry. I know, anyway, that I
will not be put off with a compromise, with a recurring zero, simply
because it is consistent with the laws of nature and actually exists. I
will not accept as the crown of my desires a block of buildings with
tenements for the poor on a lease of a thousand years, and perhaps with
a sign-board of a dentist hanging out. Destroy my desires, eradicate my
ideals, show me something better, and I will follow you. You will say,
perhaps, that it is not worth your trouble; but in that case I can give
you the same answer. We are discussing things seriously; but if you
won't deign to give me your attention, I will drop your acquaintance. I
can retreat into my underground hole.

But while I am alive and have desires I would rather my hand were
withered off than bring one brick to such a building! Don't remind me
that I have just rejected the palace of crystal for the sole reason that
one cannot put out one's tongue at it. I did not say because I am so
fond of putting my tongue out. Perhaps the thing I resented was, that of
all your edifices there has not been one at which one could not put out
one's tongue. On the contrary, I would let my tongue be cut off out of
gratitude if things could be so arranged that I should lose all desire
to put it out. It is not my fault that things cannot be so arranged, and
that one must be satisfied with model flats. Then why am I made with
such desires? Can I have been constructed simply in order to come to the
conclusion that all my construction is a cheat? Can this be my whole
purpose? I do not believe it.

But do you know what: I am convinced that we underground folk ought to
be kept on a curb. Though we may sit forty years underground without
speaking, when we do come out into the light of day and break out we
talk and talk and talk....


XI

The long and the short of it is, gentlemen, that it is better to do
nothing! Better conscious inertia! And so hurrah for underground! Though
I have said that I envy the normal man to the last drop of my bile, yet
I should not care to be in his place such as he is now (though I shall
not cease envying him). No, no; anyway the underground life is more
advantageous. There, at any rate, one can.... Oh, but even now I am
lying! I am lying because I know myself that it is not underground that
is better, but something different, quite different, for which I am
thirsting, but which I cannot find! Damn underground!

I will tell you another thing that would be better, and that is, if I
myself believed in anything of what I have just written. I swear to you,
gentlemen, there is not one thing, not one word of what I have written
that I really believe. That is, I believe it, perhaps, but at the same
time I feel and suspect that I am lying like a cobbler.

"Then why have you written all this?" you will say to me.

"I ought to put you underground for forty years without anything to do
and then come to you in your cellar, to find out what stage you have
reached! How can a man be left with nothing to do for forty years?"

"Isn't that shameful, isn't that humiliating?" you will say, perhaps,
wagging your heads contemptuously. "You thirst for life and try to
settle the problems of life by a logical tangle. And how persistent, how
insolent are your sallies, and at the same time what a scare you are in!
You talk nonsense and are pleased with it; you say impudent things and
are in continual alarm and apologizing for them. You declare that you
are afraid of nothing and at the same time try to ingratiate yourself in
our good opinion. You declare that you are gnashing your teeth and at
the same time you try to be witty so as to amuse us. You know that your
witticisms are not witty, but you are evidently well satisfied with
their literary value. You may, perhaps, have really suffered, but you
have no respect for your own suffering. You may have sincerity, but you
have no modesty; out of the pettiest vanity you expose your sincerity to
publicity and ignominy. You doubtlessly mean to say something, but hide
your last word through fear, because you have not the resolution to
utter it, and only have a cowardly impudence. You boast of
consciousness, but you are not sure of your ground, for though your mind
works, yet your heart is darkened and corrupt, and you cannot have a
full, genuine consciousness without a pure heart. And how intrusive you
are, how you insist and grimace! Lies, lies, lies!"

Of course I have myself made up all the things you say. That, too, is
from underground. I have been for forty years listening to you through a
crack under the floor. I have invented them myself, there was nothing
else I could invent. It is no wonder that I have learned it by heart and
it has taken a literary form....

But can you really be so credulous as to think that I will print all
this and give it to you to read too? And another problem: why do I call
you "gentlemen," why do I address you as though you really were my
readers? Such confessions as I intend to make are never printed nor
given to other people to read. Anyway, I am not strong-minded enough for
that, and I don't see why I should be. But you see a fancy has occurred
to me and I want to realize it at all costs. Let me explain.

Every man has reminiscences which he would not tell to every one, but
only to his friends. He has other matters in his mind which he would not
reveal even to his friends, but only to himself, and that in secret. But
there are other things which a man is afraid to tell even to himself,
and every decent man has a number of such things stored away in his
mind. The more decent he is, the greater the number of such things in
his mind. Anyway, I have only lately determined to remember some of my
early adventures. Till now I have always avoided them, even with a
certain uneasiness. Now, when I am not only recalling them, but have
actually decided to write an account of them, I want to try the
experiment whether one can, even with oneself, be perfectly open and not
take fright at the whole truth. I will observe, in parenthesis, that
Heine says that a true autobiography is almost an impossibility, and
that man is bound to lie about himself. He considers that Rousseau
certainly told lies about himself in his confessions, and even
intentionally lied, out of vanity. I am convinced that Heine is right; I
quite understand how sometimes one may, out of sheer vanity, attribute
regular crimes to oneself, and indeed I can very well conceive that kind
of vanity. But Heine judged of people who made their confessions to the
public. I write only for myself, and I wish to declare once and for all
that if I write as though I were addressing readers, that is simply
because it is easier for me to write in that form. It is a form, an
empty form--I shall never have readers. I have made this plain
already....

I don't wish to be hampered by any restrictions in the compilation of my
notes. I shall not attempt any system or method. I will jot things down
as I remember them.

But here, perhaps, some one will catch at the word and ask me: if you
really don't reckon on readers, why do you make such compacts with
yourself--and on paper too--that is, that you won't attempt any system
or method, that you jot things down as you remember them, and so on, and
so on? Why are you explaining? Why do you apologize?

Well, there it is, I answer.

There is a whole psychology in all this, though. Perhaps it is simply
that I am a coward. And perhaps that I purposely imagine an audience
before me in order that I may be more dignified while I write. There are
perhaps thousands of reasons. Again, what is my object precisely in
writing? If it is not for the benefit of the public why should I not
simply recall these incidents in my own mind without putting them on
paper?

Quite so; but yet it is more imposing on paper. There is something more
impressive in it; I shall be better able to criticize myself and improve
my style. Besides, I shall perhaps obtain actual relief from writing.
To-day, for instance, I am particularly oppressed by one memory of a
distant past. It came back vividly to my mind a few days ago, and has
remained haunting me like an annoying tune that one cannot get rid of.
And yet I must get rid of it somehow. I have hundreds of such
reminiscences; but at times some one stands out from the hundred and
oppresses me. For some reason I believe that if I write it down I should
get rid of it. Why not try?

Besides, I am bored, and I never have anything to do. Writing will be a
sort of work. They say work makes man kind-hearted and honest. Well,
here is a chance for me, anyway.

Snow is falling to-day, yellow and dingy. It fell yesterday, too, and a
few days ago. I fancy it is the wet snow that has reminded me of that
incident which I cannot shake off now. And so let it be a story _à
propos_ of the falling snow.




  PART II

  À PROPOS OF THE WET SNOW


  When from dark error's subjugation
  My words of passionate exhortation
    Had wrenched thy fainting spirit free;
  And writhing prone in thine affliction
  Thou didst recall with malediction
    The vice that had encompassed thee:
  And when thy slumbering conscience, fretting
    By recollection's torturing flame,
  Thou didst reveal the hideous setting
    Of thy life's current ere I came:
  When suddenly I saw thee sicken,
    And weeping, hide thine anguished face,
  Revolted, maddened, horror-stricken,
    At memories of foul disgrace.

                   NEKRASSOV (_translated by Juliet Soskice_).


I

At that time I was only twenty-four. My life was even then gloomy,
ill-regulated, and as solitary as that of a savage. I made friends with
no one and positively avoided talking, and buried myself more and more
in my hole. At work in the office I never looked at any one, and I was
perfectly well aware that my companions looked upon me, not only as a
queer fellow, but even looked upon me--I always fancied this--with a
sort of loathing. I sometimes wondered why it was that nobody except me
fancied that he was looked upon with aversion? One of the clerks had a
most repulsive, pock-marked face, which looked positively villainous. I
believe I should not have dared to look at any one with such an
unsightly countenance. Another had such a very dirty old uniform that
there was an unpleasant odour in his proximity. Yet not one of these
gentlemen showed the slightest self-consciousness--either about their
clothes or their countenance or their character in any way. Neither of
them ever imagined that they were looked at with repulsion; if they had
imagined it they would not have minded--so long as their superiors did
not look at them in that way. It is clear to me now that, owing to my
unbounded vanity and to the high standard I set for myself, I often
looked at myself with furious discontent, which verged on loathing, and
so I inwardly attributed the same feeling to every one. I hated my face,
for instance: I thought it disgusting, and even suspected that there was
something base in my expression, and so every day when I turned up at
the office I tried to behave as independently as possible, and to assume
a lofty expression, so that I might not be suspected of being abject.
"My face may be ugly," I thought, "but let it be lofty, expressive, and,
above all, _extremely_ intelligent." But I was positively and painfully
certain that it was impossible for my countenance ever to express those
qualities. And what was worst of all, I thought it actually stupid
looking, and I would have been quite satisfied if I could have looked
intelligent. In fact, I would even have put up with looking base if, at
the same time, my face could have been thought strikingly intelligent.

Of course, I hated my fellow clerks one and all, and I despised them
all, yet at the same time I was, as it were, afraid of them. In fact, it
happened at times that I thought more highly of them than of myself. It
somehow happened quite suddenly that I alternated between despising them
and thinking them superior to myself. A cultivated and decent man cannot
be vain without setting a fearfully high standard for himself, and
without despising and almost hating himself at certain moments. But
whether I despised them or thought them superior I dropped my eyes
almost every time I met any one. I even made experiments whether I could
face so and so's looking at me, and I was always the first to drop my
eyes. This worried me to distraction. I had a sickly dread, too, of
being ridiculous, and so had a slavish passion for the conventional in
everything external. I loved to fall into the common rut, and had a
whole-hearted terror of any kind of eccentricity in myself. But how
could I live up to it? I was morbidly sensitive, as a man of our age
should be. They were all stupid, and as like one another as so many
sheep. Perhaps I was the only one in the office who fancied that I was a
coward and a slave, and I fancied it just because I was more highly
developed. But it was not only that I fancied it, it really was so. I
was a coward and a slave. I say this without the slightest
embarrassment. Every decent man of our age must be a coward and a slave.
That is his normal condition. Of that I am firmly persuaded. He is made
and constructed to that very end. And not only at the present time owing
to some casual circumstances, but always, at all times, a decent man is
bound to be a coward and a slave. It is the law of nature for all decent
people all over the earth. If any one of them happens to be valiant
about something, he need not be comforted nor carried away by that; he
would show the white feather just the same before something else. That
is how it invariably and inevitably ends. Only donkeys and mules are
valiant, and they only till they are pushed up to the wall. It is not
worth while to pay attention to them for they really are of no
consequence.

Another circumstance, too, worried me in those days: that there was no
one like me and I was unlike any one else. "I am alone and they are
_every one_," I thought--and pondered.

From that it is evident that I was still a youngster.

The very opposite sometimes happened. It was loathsome sometimes to go
to the office; things reached such a point that I often came home ill.
But all at once, _à propos_ of nothing, there would come a phase of
scepticism and indifference (everything happened in phases to me), and I
would laugh myself at my intolerance and fastidiousness, I would
reproach myself with being _romantic_. At one time I was unwilling to
speak to any one, while at other times I would not only talk, but go to
the length of contemplating making friends with them. All my
fastidiousness would suddenly, for no rhyme or reason, vanish. Who
knows, perhaps I never had really had it, and it had simply been
affected, and got out of books. I have not decided that question even
now. Once I quite made friends with them, visited their homes, played
preference, drank vodka, talked of promotions.... But here let me make a
digression.

We Russians, speaking generally, have never had those foolish
transcendental "romantics"--German, and still more French--on whom
nothing produces any effect; if there were an earthquake, if all France
perished at the barricades, they would still be the same, they would not
even have the decency to affect a change, but would still go on singing
their transcendental songs to the hour of their death, because they are
fools. We, in Russia, have no fools; that is well known. That is what
distinguishes us from foreign lands. Consequently these transcendental
natures are not found amongst us in their pure form. The idea that they
are is due to our "realistic" journalists and critics of that day,
always on the look out for Kostanzhoglos and Uncle Pyotr Ivanitchs and
foolishly accepting them as our ideal; they have slandered our
romantics, taking them for the same transcendental sort as in Germany or
France. On the contrary, the characteristics of our "romantics" are
absolutely and directly opposed to the transcendental European type, and
no European standard can be applied to them. (Allow me to make use of
this word "romantic"--an old-fashioned and much respected word which has
done good service and is familiar to all). The characteristics of our
romantic are to understand everything, _to see everything and to see it
often incomparably more clearly than our most realistic minds see it_;
to refuse to accept anyone or anything, but at the same time not to
despise anything; to give way, to yield, from policy; never to lose
sight of a useful practical object (such as rent-free quarters at the
government expense, pensions, decorations), to keep their eye on that
object through all the enthusiasms and volumes of lyrical poems, and at
the same time to preserve "the good and the beautiful" inviolate within
them to the hour of their death, and to preserve themselves also,
incidentally, like some precious jewel wrapped in cotton wool if only
for the benefit of "the good and the beautiful." Our "romantic" is a man
of great breadth and the greatest rogue of all our rogues, I assure
you.... I can assure you from experience, indeed. Of course, that is, if
he is intelligent. But what am I saying! The romantic is always
intelligent, and I only meant to observe that although we have had
foolish romantics they don't count, and they were only so because in the
flower of their youth they degenerated into Germans, and to preserve
their precious jewel more comfortably, settled somewhere out there--by
preference in Weimar or the Black Forest.

I, for instance, genuinely despised my official work and did not openly
abuse it simply because I was in it myself and got a salary for it.
Anyway, take note, I did not openly abuse it. Our romantic would rather
go out of his mind--a thing, however, which very rarely happens--than
take to open abuse, unless he had some other career in view; and he is
never kicked out. At most, they would take him to the lunatic asylum as
"the King of Spain" if he should go very mad. But it is only the thin,
fair people who go out of their minds in Russia. Innumerable "romantics"
attain later in life to considerable rank in the service. Their
many-sidedness is remarkable! And what a faculty they have for the most
contradictory sensations! I was comforted by this thought even in those
days, and I am of the same opinion now. That is why there are so many
"broad natures" among us who never lose their ideal even in the depths
of degradation; and though they never stir a finger for their ideal,
though they are arrant thieves and knaves, yet they tearfully cherish
their first ideal and are extraordinarily honest at heart. Yes, it is
only among us that the most incorrigible rogue can be absolutely and
loftily honest at heart without in the least ceasing to be a rogue. I
repeat, our romantics, frequently, become such accomplished rascals (I
use the term "rascals" affectionately), suddenly display such a sense of
reality and practical knowledge that their bewildered superiors and the
public generally can only ejaculate in amazement.

Their many-sidedness is really amazing, and goodness knows what it may
develop into later on, and what the future has in store for us. It is
not a poor material! I do not say this from any foolish or boastful
patriotism. But I feel sure that you are again imagining that I am
joking. Or perhaps it's just the contrary, and you are convinced that I
really think so. Anyway, gentlemen, I shall welcome both views as an
honour and a special favour. And do forgive my digression.

I did not, of course, maintain friendly relations with my comrades and
soon was at loggerheads with them, and in my youth and inexperience I
even gave up bowing to them, as though I had cut off all relations.
That, however, only happened to me once. As a rule, I was always alone.

In the first place I spent most of my time at home, reading. I tried to
stifle all that was continually seething within me by means of external
impressions. And the only external means I had was reading. Reading, of
course, was a great help--exciting me, giving me pleasure and pain. But
at times it bored me fearfully. One longed for movement in spite of
everything, and I plunged all at once into dark, underground, loathsome
vice of the pettiest kind. My wretched passions were acute, smarting,
from my continual, sickly irritability. I had hysterical impulses, with
tears and convulsions. I had no resource except reading, that is, there
was nothing in my surroundings which I could respect and which attracted
me. I was overwhelmed with depression, too; I had an hysterical craving
for incongruity and for contrast, and so I took to vice. I have not said
all this to justify myself.... But, no! I am lying. I did want to
justify myself. I make that little observation for my own benefit,
gentlemen. I don't want to lie. I vowed to myself I would not.

And so, furtively, timidly, in solitude, at night, I indulged in filthy
vice, with a feeling of shame which never deserted me, even at the most
loathsome moments, and which at such moments nearly made me curse.
Already even then I had my underground world in my soul. I was fearfully
afraid of being seen, of being met, of being recognized. I visited
various obscure haunts.

One night as I was passing a tavern I saw through a lighted window some
gentlemen fighting with billiard cues, and saw one of them thrown out of
window. At other times I should have felt very much disgusted, but I was
in such a mood at the time, that I actually envied the gentleman thrown
out of window--and I envied him so much that I even went into the tavern
and into the billiard-room. "Perhaps," I thought, "I'll have a fight,
too, and they'll throw me out of window."

I was not drunk--but what is one to do--depression will drive a man to
such a pitch of hysteria? But nothing happened. It seemed that I was not
even equal to being thrown out of window and I went away without having
my fight.

An officer put me in my place from the first moment.

I was standing by the billiard-table and in my ignorance blocking up the
way, and he wanted to pass; he took me by the shoulders and without a
word--without a warning or explanation--moved me from where I was
standing to another spot and passed by as though he had not noticed me.
I could have forgiven blows, but I could not forgive his having moved me
without noticing me.

Devil knows what I would have given for a real regular quarrel--a more
decent, a more _literary_ one, so to speak. I had been treated like a
fly. This officer was over six foot, while I was a spindly little
fellow. But the quarrel was in my hands. I had only to protest and I
certainly would have been thrown out of the window. But I changed my
mind and preferred to beat a resentful retreat.

I went out of the tavern straight home, confused and troubled, and the
next night I went out again with the same lewd intentions, still more
furtively, abjectly and miserably than before, as it were, with tears in
my eyes--but still I did go out again. Don't imagine, though, it was
cowardice made me slink away from the officer: I never have been a
coward at heart, though I have always been a coward in action. Don't be
in a hurry to laugh--I assure you I can explain it all.

Oh, if only that officer had been one of the sort who would consent to
fight a duel! But no, he was one of those gentlemen (alas, long
extinct!) who preferred fighting with cues or, like Gogol's Lieutenant
Pirogov, appealing to the police. They did not fight duels and would
have thought a duel with a civilian like me an utterly unseemly
procedure in any case--and they looked upon the duel altogether as
something impossible, something free-thinking and French. But they were
quite ready to bully, especially when they were over six foot.

I did not slink away through cowardice, but through an unbounded vanity.
I was afraid not of his six foot, not of getting a sound thrashing and
being thrown out of the window; I should have had physical courage
enough, I assure you; but I had not the moral courage. What I was afraid
of was that every one present, from the insolent marker down to the
lowest little stinking, pimply clerk in a greasy collar, would jeer at
me and fail to understand when I began to protest and to address them in
literary language. For of the point of honour--not of honour, but of the
point of honour (_point d'honneur_)--one cannot speak among us except in
literary language. You can't allude to the "point of honour" in ordinary
language. I was fully convinced (the sense of reality, in spite of all
my romanticism!) that they would all simply split their sides with
laughter, and that the officer would not simply beat me, that is,
without insulting me, but would certainly prod me in the back with his
knee, kick me round the billiard table, and only then perhaps have pity
and drop me out of the window.

Of course, this trivial incident could not with me end in that. I often
met that officer afterwards in the street and noticed him very
carefully. I am not quite sure whether he recognized me, I imagine not;
I judge from certain signs. But I--I stared at him with spite and hatred
and so it went on ... for several years! My resentment grew even deeper
with years. At first I began making stealthy inquiries about this
officer. It was difficult for me to do so, for I knew no one. But one
day I heard some one shout his surname in the street as I was following
him at a distance, as though I were tied to him--and so I learnt his
surname. Another time I followed him to his flat, and for ten kopecks
learned from the porter where he lived, on which storey, whether he
lived alone or with others, and so on--in fact, everything one could
learn from a porter. One morning, though I had never tried my hand with
the pen, it suddenly occurred to me to write a satire on this officer in
the form of a novel which would unmask his villainy. I wrote the novel
with relish. I did unmask his villainy, I even exaggerated it; at first
I so altered his surname that it could easily be recognized, but on
second thoughts I changed it, and sent the story to the
_Otetchestvenniya Zapiski_. But at that time such attacks were not the
fashion and my story was not printed. That was a great vexation to me.

Sometimes I was positively choked with resentment. At last I determined
to challenge my enemy to a duel. I composed a splendid, charming letter
to him, imploring him to apologize to me, and hinting rather plainly at
a duel in case of refusal. The letter was so composed that if the
officer had had the least understanding of the good and the beautiful he
would certainly have flung himself on my neck and have offered me his
friendship. And how fine that would have been! How we should have got on
together! "He could have shielded me with his higher rank, while I could
have improved his mind with my culture, and, well ... my ideas, and all
sorts of things might have happened." Only fancy, this was two years
after his insult to me, and my challenge would have been a ridiculous
anachronism, in spite of all the ingenuity of my letter in disguising
and explaining away the anachronism. But, thank God (to this day I thank
the Almighty with tears in my eyes) I did not send the letter to him.
Cold shivers run down my back when I think of what might have happened
if I had sent it.

And all at once I revenged myself in the simplest way, by a stroke of
genius! A brilliant thought suddenly dawned upon me. Sometimes on
holidays I used to stroll along the sunny side of the Nevsky about four
o'clock in the afternoon. Though it was hardly a stroll so much as a
series of innumerable miseries, humiliations and resentments; but no
doubt that was just what I wanted. I used to wriggle along in a most
unseemly fashion, like an eel, continually moving aside to make way for
generals, for officers of the guards and the hussars, or for ladies. At
such minutes there used to be a convulsive twinge at my heart, and I
used to feel hot all down my back at the mere thought of the
wretchedness of my attire, of the wretchedness and abjectness of my
little scurrying figure. This was a regular martyrdom, a continual,
intolerable humiliation at the thought, which passed into an incessant
and direct sensation, that I was a mere fly in the eyes of all this
world, a nasty, disgusting fly--more intelligent, more highly developed,
more refined in feeling than any of them, of course--but a fly that was
continually making way for every one, insulted and injured by every one.
Why I inflicted this torture upon myself, why I went to the Nevsky, I
don't know. I felt simply drawn there at every possible opportunity.

Already then I began to experience a rush of the enjoyment of which I
spoke in the first chapter. After my affair with the officer I felt even
more drawn there than before: it was on the Nevsky that I met him most
frequently, there I could admire him. He, too, went there chiefly on
holidays. He, too, turned out of his path for generals and persons of
high rank, and he, too, wriggled between them like an eel; but people,
like me, or even better dressed like me, he simply walked over; he made
straight for them as though there was nothing but empty space before
him, and never, under any circumstances, turned aside. I gloated over my
resentment watching him and ... always resentfully made way for him. It
exasperated me that even in the street I could not be on an even footing
with him.

"Why must you invariably be the first to move aside?" I kept asking
myself in hysterical rage, waking up sometimes at three o'clock in the
morning. "Why is it you and not he? There's no regulation about it;
there's no written law. Let the making way be equal as it usually is
when refined people meet: he moves half-way and you move half-way; you
pass with mutual respect."

But that never happened, and I always moved aside, while he did not even
notice my making way for him. And lo and behold a bright idea dawned
upon me! "What," I thought, "if I meet him and don't move on one side?
What if I don't move aside on purpose, even if I knock up against him?
How would that be?" This audacious idea took such a hold on me that it
gave me no peace. I was dreaming of it continually, horribly, and I
purposely went more frequently to the Nevsky in order to picture more
vividly how I should do it when I did do it. I was delighted. This
intention seemed to me more and more practical and possible.

"Of course I shall not really push him," I thought, already more
good-natured in my joy. "I will simply not turn aside, will run up
against him, not very violently, but just shouldering each other--just
as much as decency permits. I will push against him just as much as he
pushes against me." At last I made up my mind completely. But my
preparations took a great deal of time. To begin with, when I carried
out my plan I should need to be looking rather more decent, and so I had
to think of my get-up. "In case of emergency, if, for instance, there
were any sort of public scandal (and the public there is of the most
_recherché_: the Countess walks there; Prince D. walks there; all the
literary world is there), I must be well dressed; that inspires respect
and of itself puts us on an equal footing in the eyes of society."

With this object I asked for some of my salary in advance, and bought at
Tchurkin's a pair of black gloves and a decent hat. Black gloves seemed
to me both more dignified and _bon ton_ than the lemon-coloured ones
which I had contemplated at first. "The colour is too gaudy, it looks as
though one were trying to be conspicuous," and I did not take the
lemon-coloured ones. I had got ready long beforehand a good shirt, with
white bone studs; my overcoat was the only thing that held me back. The
coat in itself was a very good one, it kept me warm; but it was wadded
and it had a raccoon collar which was the height of vulgarity. I had to
change the collar at any sacrifice, and to have a beaver one like an
officer's. For this purpose I began visiting the Gostiny Dvor and after
several attempts I pitched upon a piece of cheap German beaver. Though
these German beavers soon grow shabby and look wretched, yet at first
they look exceedingly well, and I only needed it for one occasion. I
asked the price; even so, it was too expensive. After thinking it over
thoroughly I decided to sell my raccoon collar. The rest of the money--a
considerable sum for me, I decided to borrow from Anton Antonitch
Syetotchkin, my immediate superior, an unassuming person, though grave
and judicious. He never lent money to any one, but I had, on entering
the service, been specially recommended to him by an important personage
who had got me my berth. I was horribly worried. To borrow from Anton
Antonitch seemed to me monstrous and shameful. I did not sleep for two
or three nights. Indeed, I did not sleep well at that time, I was in a
fever; I had a vague sinking at my heart or else a sudden throbbing,
throbbing, throbbing! Anton Antonitch was surprised at first, then he
frowned, then he reflected, and did after all lend me the money,
receiving from me a written authorization to take from my salary a
fortnight later the sum that he had lent me.

In this way everything was at last ready. The handsome beaver replaced
the mean-looking raccoon, and I began by degrees to get to work. It
would never have done to act off-hand, at random; the plan had to be
carried out skilfully, by degrees. But I must confess that after many
efforts I began to despair: we simply could not run into each other. I
made every preparation, I was quite determined--it seemed as though we
should run into one another directly--and before I knew what I was doing
I had stepped aside for him again and he had passed without noticing me.
I even prayed as I approached him that God would grant me determination.
One time I had made up my mind thoroughly, but it ended in my stumbling
and falling at his feet because at the very last instant when I was six
inches from him my courage failed me. He very calmly stepped over me,
while I flew on one side like a ball. That night I was ill again,
feverish and delirious.

And suddenly it ended most happily. The night before I had made up my
mind not to carry out my fatal plan and to abandon it all, and with that
object I went to the Nevsky for the last time, just to see how I would
abandon it all. Suddenly, three paces from my enemy, I unexpectedly made
up my mind--I closed my eyes, and we ran full tilt, shoulder to
shoulder, against one another! I did not budge an inch and passed him on
a perfectly equal footing! He did not even look round and pretended not
to notice it; but he was only pretending, I am convinced of that. I am
convinced of that to this day! Of course, I got the worst of it--he was
stronger, but that was not the point. The point was that I had attained
my object, I had kept up my dignity, I had not yielded a step, and had
put myself publicly on an equal social footing with him. I returned home
feeling that I was fully avenged for everything. I was delighted. I was
triumphant and sang Italian arias. Of course, I will not describe to you
what happened to me three days later; if you have read my first chapter
you can guess that for yourself. The officer was afterwards transferred;
I have not seen him now for fourteen years. What is the dear fellow
doing now? Whom is he walking over?


II

But the period of my dissipation would end and I always felt very sick
afterwards. It was followed by remorse--I tried to drive it away: I felt
too sick. By degrees, however, I grew used to that too. I grew used to
everything, or rather I voluntarily resigned myself to enduring it. But
I had a means of escape that reconciled everything--that was to find
refuge in "the good and the beautiful," in dreams, of course. I was a
terrible dreamer, I would dream for three months on end, tucked away in
my corner, and you may believe me that at those moments I had no
resemblance to the gentleman who, in the perturbation of his chicken
heart, put a collar of German beaver on his great coat. I suddenly
became a hero. I would not have admitted my six-foot lieutenant even if
he had called on me. I could not even picture him before me then. What
were my dreams and how I could satisfy myself with them--it is hard to
say now, but at the time I was satisfied with them. Though, indeed, even
now, I am to some extent satisfied with them. Dreams were particularly
sweet and vivid after a spell of dissipation; they came with remorse and
with tears, with curses and transports. There were moments of such
positive intoxication, of such happiness, that there was not the
faintest trace of irony within me, on my honour. I had faith, hope,
love. I believed blindly at such times that by some miracle, by some
external circumstance, all this would suddenly open out, expand; that
suddenly a vista of suitable activity--beneficent, good, and, above all,
_ready made_ (what sort of activity I had no idea, but the great thing
was that it should be all ready for me)--would rise up before me--and I
should come out into the light of day, almost riding a white horse and
crowned with laurel. Anything but the foremost place I could not
conceive for myself, and for that very reason I quite contentedly
occupied the lowest in reality. Either to be a hero or to grovel in the
mud--there was nothing between. That was my ruin, for when I was in the
mud I comforted myself with the thought that at other times I was a
hero, and the hero was a cloak for the mud: for an ordinary man it was
shameful to defile himself, but a hero was too lofty to be utterly
defiled, and so he might defile himself. It is worth noting that these
attacks of the "good and the beautiful" visited me even during the
period of dissipation and just at the times when I was touching the
bottom. They came in separate spurts, as though reminding me of
themselves, but did not banish the dissipation by their appearance. On
the contrary, they seemed to add a zest to it by contrast, and were only
sufficiently present to serve as an appetizing sauce. That sauce was
made up of contradictions and sufferings, of agonizing inward analysis
and all these pangs and pin-pricks gave a certain piquancy, even a
significance to my dissipation--in fact, completely answered the purpose
of an appetizing sauce. There was a certain depth of meaning in it. And
I could hardly have resigned myself to the simple, vulgar, direct
debauchery of a clerk and have endured all the filthiness of it. What
could have allured me about it then and have drawn me at night into the
street? No, I had a lofty way of getting out of it all.

And what loving-kindness, oh Lord, what loving-kindness I felt at times
in those dreams of mine! in those "flights into the good and the
beautiful;" though it was fantastic love, though it was never applied to
anything human in reality, yet there was so much of this love that one
did not feel afterwards even the impulse to apply it in reality; that
would have been superfluous. Everything, however, passed satisfactorily
by a lazy and fascinating transition into the sphere of art, that is,
into the beautiful forms of life, lying ready, largely stolen from the
poets and novelists and adapted to all sorts of needs and uses. I, for
instance, was triumphant over every one; every one, of course, was in
dust and ashes, and was forced spontaneously to recognize my
superiority, and I forgave them all. I was a poet and a grand gentleman,
I fell in love; I came in for countless millions and immediately devoted
them to humanity, and at the same time I confessed before all the people
my shameful deeds, which, of course, were not merely shameful, but had
in them much that was "good and beautiful," something in the Manfred
style. Every one would kiss me and weep (what idiots they would be if
they did not), while I should go barefoot and hungry preaching new ideas
and fighting a victorious Austerlitz against the obscurantists. Then the
band would play a march, an amnesty would be declared, the Pope would
agree to retire from Rome to Brazil; then there would be a ball for the
whole of Italy at the Villa Borghese on the shores of the Lake of Como,
the Lake of Como being for that purpose transferred to the neighbourhood
of Rome; then would come a scene in the bushes, and so on, and so on--as
though you did not know all about it? You will say that it is vulgar and
contemptible to drag all this into public after all the tears and
transports which I have myself confessed. But why is it contemptible?
Can you imagine that I am ashamed of it all, and that it was stupider
than anything in your life, gentlemen? And I can assure you that some of
these fancies were by no means badly composed.... It did not all happen
on the shores of Lake Como. And yet you are right--it really is vulgar
and contemptible. And most contemptible of all it is that now I am
attempting to justify myself to you. And even more contemptible than
that is my making this remark now. But that's enough, or there will be
no end to it: each step will be more contemptible than the last....

I could never stand more than three months of dreaming at a time without
feeling an irresistible desire to plunge into society. To plunge into
society meant to visit my superior at the office, Anton Antonitch
Syetotchkin. He was the only permanent acquaintance I have had in my
life, and wonder at the fact myself now. But I only went to see him when
that phase came over me, and when my dreams had reached such a point of
bliss that it became essential at once to embrace my fellows and all
mankind; and for that purpose I needed, at least, one human being,
actually existing. I had to call on Anton Antonitch, however, on
Tuesday--his at-home day; so I had always to time my passionate desire
to embrace humanity so that it might fall on a Tuesday.

This Anton Antonitch lived on the fourth storey in a house in Five
Corners, in four low-pitched rooms, one smaller than the other, of a
particularly frugal and sallow appearance. He had two daughters and
their aunt, who used to pour out the tea. Of the daughters one was
thirteen and another fourteen, they both had snub noses, and I was
awfully shy of them because they were always whispering and giggling
together. The master of the house usually sat in his study on a leather
couch in front of the table with some grey-headed gentleman, usually a
colleague from our office or some other department. I never saw more
than two or three visitors there, always the same. They talked about the
excise duty; about business in the senate, about salaries, about
promotions, about His Excellency, and the best means of pleasing him,
and so on. I had the patience to sit like a fool beside these people for
four hours at a stretch, listening to them without knowing what to say
to them or venturing to say a word. I became stupified, several times I
felt myself perspiring, I was overcome by a sort of paralysis; but this
was pleasant and good for me. On returning home I deferred for a time my
desire to embrace all mankind.

I had however one other acquaintance of a sort, Simonov, who was an old
schoolfellow. I had a number of schoolfellows indeed in Petersburg, but
I did not associate with them and had even given up nodding to them in
the street. I believe I had transferred into the department I was in
simply to avoid their company and to cut off all connection with my
hateful childhood. Curses on that school and all those terrible years of
penal servitude! In short, I parted from my schoolfellows as soon as I
got out into the world. There were two or three left to whom I nodded in
the street. One of them was Simonov, who had been in no way
distinguished at school, was of a quiet and equable disposition; but I
discovered in him a certain independence of character and even honesty.
I don't even suppose that he was particularly stupid. I had at one time
spent some rather soulful moments with him, but these had not lasted
long and had somehow been suddenly clouded over. He was evidently
uncomfortable at these reminiscences, and was, I fancy, always afraid
that I might take up the same tone again. I suspected that he had an
aversion for me, but still I went on going to see him, not being quite
certain of it.

And so on one occasion, unable to endure my solitude and knowing that as
it was Thursday Anton Antonitch's door would be closed, I thought of
Simonov. Climbing up to his fourth storey I was thinking that the man
disliked me and that it was a mistake to go and see him. But as it
always happened that such reflections impelled me, as though purposely,
to put myself into a false position, I went in. It was almost a year
since I had last seen Simonov.


III

I found two of my old schoolfellows with him. They seemed to be
discussing an important matter. All of them took scarcely any notice of
my entrance, which was strange, for I had not met them for years.
Evidently they looked upon me as something on the level of a common fly.
I had not been treated like that even at school, though they all hated
me. I knew, of course, that they must despise me now for my lack of
success in the service, and for my having let myself sink so low, going
about badly dressed and so on--which seemed to them a sign of my
incapacity and insignificance. But I had not expected such contempt.
Simonov was positively surprised at my turning up. Even in old days he
had always seemed surprised at my coming. All this disconcerted me: I
sat down, feeling rather miserable, and began listening to what they
were saying.

They were engaged in warm and earnest conversation about a farewell
dinner which they wanted to arrange for the next day to a comrade of
theirs called Zverkov, an officer in the army, who was going away to a
distant province. This Zverkov had been all the time at school with me
too. I had begun to hate him particularly in the upper forms. In the
lower forms he had simply been a pretty, playful boy whom everybody
liked. I had hated him, however, even in the lower forms, just because
he was a pretty and playful boy. He was always bad at his lessons and
got worse and worse as he went on; however, he left with a good
certificate, as he had powerful interest. During his last year at school
he came in for an estate of two hundred serfs, and as almost all of us
were poor he took up a swaggering tone among us. He was vulgar in the
extreme, but at the same time he was a good-natured fellow, even in his
swaggering. In spite of superficial, fantastic and sham notions of
honour and dignity, all but very few of us positively grovelled before
Zverkov, and the more so the more he swaggered. And it was not from any
interested motive that they grovelled, but simply because he had been
favoured by the gifts of nature. Moreover, it was, as it were, an
accepted idea among us that Zverkov was a specialist in regard to tact
and the social graces. This last fact particularly infuriated me. I
hated the abrupt self-confident tone of his voice, his admiration of his
own witticisms, which were often frightfully stupid, though he was bold
in his language; I hated his handsome, but stupid face (for which I
would, however, have gladly exchanged my intelligent one), and the
free-and-easy military manners in fashion in the "'forties." I hated the
way in which he used to talk of his future conquests of women (he did
not venture to begin his attack upon women until he had the epaulettes
of an officer, and was looking forward to them with impatience), and
boasted of the duels he would constantly be fighting. I remember how I,
invariably so taciturn, suddenly fastened upon Zverkov, when one day
talking at a leisure moment with his schoolfellows of his future
relations with the fair sex, and growing as sportive as a puppy in the
sun, he all at once declared that he would not leave a single village
girl on his estate unnoticed, that that was his _droit de seigneur_, and
that if the peasants dared to protest he would have them all flogged and
double the tax on them, the bearded rascals. Our servile rabble
applauded, but I attacked him, not from compassion for the girls and
their fathers, but simply because they were applauding such an insect. I
got the better of him on that occasion, but though Zverkov was stupid he
was lively and impudent, and so laughed it off, and in such a way that
my victory was not really complete: the laugh was on his side. He got
the better of me on several occasions afterwards, but without malice,
jestingly, casually. I remained angrily and contemptuously silent and
would not answer him. When we left school he made advances to me; I did
not rebuff them, for I was flattered, but we soon parted and quite
naturally. Afterwards I heard of his barrack-room success as a
lieutenant, and of the fast life he was leading. Then there came other
rumours--of his successes in the service. By then he had taken to
cutting me in the street, and I suspected that he was afraid of
compromising himself by greeting a personage as insignificant as me. I
saw him once in the theatre, in the third tier of boxes. By then he was
wearing shoulder-straps. He was twisting and twirling about,
ingratiating himself with the daughters of an ancient General. In three
years he had gone off considerably, though he was still rather handsome
and adroit. One could see that by the time he was thirty he would be
corpulent. So it was to this Zverkov that my schoolfellows were going to
give a dinner on his departure. They had kept up with him for those
three years, though privately they did not consider themselves on an
equal footing with him, I am convinced of that.

Of Simonov's two visitors, one was Ferfitchkin, a Russianized German--a
little fellow with the face of a monkey, a blockhead who was always
deriding every one, a very bitter enemy of mine from our days in the
lower forms--a vulgar, impudent, swaggering fellow, who affected a most
sensitive feeling of personal honour, though, of course, he was a
wretched little coward at heart. He was one of those worshippers of
Zverkov who made up to the latter from interested motives, and often
borrowed money from him. Simonov's other visitor, Trudolyubov, was a
person in no way remarkable--a tall young fellow, in the army, with a
cold face, fairly honest, though he worshipped success of every sort,
and was only capable of thinking of promotion. He was some sort of
distant relation of Zverkov's, and this, foolish as it seems, gave him a
certain importance among us. He always thought me of no consequence
whatever; his behaviour to me, though not quite courteous, was
tolerable.

"Well, with seven roubles each," said Trudolyubov, "twenty-one roubles
between the three of us, we ought to be able to get a good dinner.
Zverkov, of course, won't pay."

"Of course not, since we are inviting him," Simonov decided.

"Can you imagine," Ferfitchkin interrupted hotly and conceitedly, like
some insolent flunkey boasting of his master the General's decorations,
"can you imagine that Zverkov will let us pay alone? He will accept from
delicacy, but he will order half a dozen bottles of champagne."

"Do we want half a dozen for the four of us?" observed Trudolyubov,
taking notice only of the half dozen.

"So the three of us, with Zverkov for the fourth, twenty-one roubles, at
the Hôtel de Paris at five o'clock to-morrow," Simonov, who had been
asked to make the arrangements, concluded finally.

"How twenty-one roubles?" I asked in some agitation, with a show of
being offended; "if you count me it will not be twenty-one, but
twenty-eight roubles."

It seemed to me that to invite myself so suddenly and unexpectedly would
be positively graceful, and that they would all be conquered at once and
would look at me with respect.

"Do you want to join, too?" Simonov observed, with no appearance of
pleasure, seeming to avoid looking at me. He knew me through and
through.

It infuriated me that he knew me so thoroughly.

"Why not? I am an old schoolfellow of his, too, I believe, and I must
own I feel hurt that you have left me out," I said, boiling over again.

"And where were we to find you?" Ferfitchkin put in roughly.

"You never were on good terms with Zverkov," Trudolyubov added,
frowning.

But I had already clutched at the idea and would not give it up.

"It seems to me that no one has a right to form an opinion upon that," I
retorted in a shaking voice, as though something tremendous had
happened. "Perhaps that is just my reason for wishing it now, that I
have not always been on good terms with him."

"Oh, there's no making you out ... with these refinements," Trudolyubov
jeered.

"We'll put your name down," Simonov decided, addressing me. "To-morrow
at five o'clock at the Hôtel de Paris."

"What about the money?" Ferfitchkin began in an undertone, indicating me
to Simonov, but he broke off, for even Simonov was embarrassed.

"That will do," said Trudolyubov, getting up. "If he wants to come so
much, let him."

"But it's a private thing, between us friends," Ferfitchkin said
crossly, as he, too, picked up his hat. "It's not an official
gathering."

"We do not want at all, perhaps...."

They went away. Ferfitchkin did not greet me in any way as he went out,
Trudolyubov barely nodded. Simonov, with whom I was left _tête-à-tête_,
was in a state of vexation and perplexity, and looked at me queerly. He
did not sit down and did not ask me to.

"H'm ... yes ... to-morrow, then. Will you pay your subscription now? I
just ask so as to know," he muttered in embarrassment.

I flushed crimson, and as I did so I remembered that I had owed Simonov
fifteen roubles for ages--which I had, indeed, never forgotten, though I
had not paid it.

"You will understand, Simonov, that I could have no idea when I came
here.... I am very much vexed that I have forgotten...."

"All right, all right, that doesn't matter. You can pay to-morrow after
the dinner. I simply wanted to know.... Please don't...."

He broke off and began pacing the room still more vexed. As he walked he
began to stamp with his heels.

"Am I keeping you?" I asked, after two minutes of silence.

"Oh!" he said, starting, "that is--to be truthful--yes. I have to go and
see some one ... not far from here," he added in an apologetic voice,
somewhat abashed.

"My goodness, why didn't you say so?" I cried, seizing my cap, with an
astonishingly free-and-easy air, which was the last thing I should have
expected of myself.

"It's close by ... not two paces away," Simonov repeated, accompanying
me to the front door with a fussy air which did not suit him at all. "So
five o'clock, punctually, to-morrow," he called down the stairs after
me. He was very glad to get rid of me. I was in a fury.

"What possessed me, what possessed me to force myself upon them?" I
wondered, grinding my teeth as I strode along the street, "for a
scoundrel, a pig like that Zverkov! Of course, I had better not go; of
course, I must just snap my fingers at them. I am not bound in any way.
I'll send Simonov a note by to-morrow's post...."

But what made me furious was that I knew for certain that I should go,
that I should make a point of going; and the more tactless, the more
unseemly my going would be, the more certainly I would go.

And there was a positive obstacle to my going: I had no money. All I had
was nine roubles, I had to give seven of that to my servant, Apollon,
for his monthly wages. That was all I paid him--he had to keep himself.

Not to pay him was impossible, considering his character. But I will
talk about that fellow, about that plague of mine, another time.

However, I knew I should go and should not pay him his wages.

That night I had the most hideous dreams. No wonder; all the evening I
had been oppressed by memories of my miserable days at school, and I
could not shake them off. I was sent to the school by distant relations,
upon whom I was dependent and of whom I have heard nothing since--they
sent me there a forlorn, silent boy, already crushed by their
reproaches, already troubled by doubt, and looking with savage distrust
at every one. My schoolfellows met me with spiteful and merciless jibes
because I was not like any of them. But I could not endure their taunts;
I could not give in to them with the ignoble readiness with which they
gave in to one another. I hated them from the first, and shut myself
away from every one in timid, wounded and disproportionate pride. Their
coarseness revolted me. They laughed cynically at my face, at my clumsy
figure; and yet what stupid faces they had themselves. In our school the
boys' faces seemed in a special way to degenerate and grow stupider. How
many fine-looking boys came to us! In a few years they became repulsive.
Even at sixteen I wondered at them morosely; even then I was struck by
the pettiness of their thoughts, the stupidity of their pursuits, their
games, their conversations. They had no understanding of such essential
things, they took no interest in such striking, impressive subjects,
that I could not help considering them inferior to myself. It was not
wounded vanity that drove me to it, and for God's sake do not thrust
upon me your hackneyed remarks, repeated to nausea, that "I was only a
dreamer," while they even then had an understanding of life. They
understood nothing, they had no idea of real life, and I swear that that
was what made me most indignant with them. On the contrary, the most
obvious, striking reality they accepted with fantastic stupidity and
even at that time were accustomed to respect success. Everything that
was just, but oppressed and looked down upon, they laughed at
heartlessly and shamefully. They took rank for intelligence; even at
sixteen they were already talking about a snug berth. Of course, a great
deal of it was due to their stupidity, to the bad examples with which
they had always been surrounded in their childhood and boyhood. They
were monstrously depraved. Of course a great deal of that, too, was
superficial and an assumption of cynicism; of course there were glimpses
of youth and freshness even in their depravity; but even that freshness
was not attractive, and showed itself in a certain rakishness. I hated
them horribly, though perhaps I was worse than any of them. They repaid
me in the same way, and did not conceal their aversion for me. But by
then I did not desire their affection: on the contrary I continually
longed for their humiliation. To escape from their derision I purposely
began to make all the progress I could with my studies and forced my way
to the very top. This impressed them. Moreover, they all began by
degrees to grasp that I had already read books none of them could read,
and understood things (not forming part of our school curriculum) of
which they had not even heard. They took a savage and sarcastic view of
it, but were morally impressed, especially as the teachers began to
notice me on those grounds. The mockery ceased, but the hostility
remained, and cold and strained relations became permanent between us.
In the end I could not put up with it: with years a craving for society,
for friends, developed in me. I attempted to get on friendly terms with
some of my schoolfellows; but somehow or other my intimacy with them was
always strained and soon ended of itself. Once, indeed, I did have a
friend. But I was already a tyrant at heart; I wanted to exercise
unbounded sway over him; I tried to instil into him a contempt for his
surroundings; I required of him a disdainful and complete break with
those surroundings. I frightened him with my passionate affection; I
reduced him to tears, to hysterics. He was a simple and devoted soul;
but when he devoted himself to me entirely I began to hate him
immediately and repulsed him--as though all I needed him for was to win
a victory over him, to subjugate him and nothing else. But I could not
subjugate all of them; my friend was not at all like them either, he
was, in fact, a rare exception. The first thing I did on leaving school
was to give up the special job for which I had been destined so as to
break all ties, to curse my past and shake the dust from off my feet....
And goodness knows why, after all that, I should go trudging off to
Simonov's!

Early next morning I roused myself and jumped out of bed with
excitement, as though it were all about to happen at once. But I
believed that some radical change in my life was coming, and would
inevitably come that day. Owing to its rarity, perhaps, any external
event, however trivial, always made me feel as though some radical
change in my life were at hand. I went to the office, however, as usual,
but sneaked away home two hours earlier to get ready. The great thing, I
thought, is not to be the first to arrive, or they will think I am
overjoyed at coming. But there were thousands of such great points to
consider, and they all agitated and overwhelmed me. I polished my boots
a second time with my own hands; nothing in the world would have induced
Apollon to clean them twice a day, as he considered that it was more
than his duties required of him. I stole the brushes to clean them from
the passage, being careful he should not detect it, for fear of his
contempt. Then I minutely examined my clothes and thought that
everything looked old, worn and threadbare. I had let myself get too
slovenly. My uniform, perhaps, was tidy, but I could not go out to
dinner in my uniform. The worst of it was that on the knee of my
trousers was a big yellow stain. I had a foreboding that that stain
would deprive me of nine-tenths of my personal dignity. I knew, too,
that it was very poor to think so. "But this is no time for thinking:
now I am in for the real thing," I thought, and my heart sank. I knew,
too, perfectly well even then, that I was monstrously exaggerating the
facts. But how could I help it? I could not control myself and was
already shaking with fever. With despair I pictured to myself how coldly
and disdainfully that "scoundrel" Zverkov would meet me; with what
dull-witted, invincible contempt the blockhead Trudolyubov would look at
me; with what impudent rudeness the insect Ferfitchkin would snigger at
me in order to curry favour with Zverkov; how completely Simonov would
take it all in, and how he would despise me for the abjectness of my
vanity and lack of spirit--and, worst of all, how paltry, _unliterary_,
commonplace it would all be. Of course, the best thing would be not to
go at all. But that was most impossible of all: if I feel impelled to do
anything, I seem to be pitchforked into it. I should have jeered at
myself ever afterwards: "So you funked it, you funked it, you funked the
_real thing_!" On the contrary, I passionately longed to show all that
"rabble" that I was by no means such a spiritless creature as I seemed
to myself. What is more, even in the acutest paroxysm of this cowardly
fever, I dreamed of getting the upper hand, of dominating them, carrying
them away, making them like me--if only for my "elevation of thought and
unmistakable wit." They would abandon Zverkov, he would sit on one side,
silent and ashamed, while I should crush him. Then, perhaps, we would be
reconciled and drink to our everlasting friendship; but what was most
bitter and most humiliating for me was that I knew even then, knew fully
and for certain, that I needed nothing of all this really, that I did
not really want to crush, to subdue, to attract them, and that I did not
care a straw really for the result, even if I did achieve it. Oh, how I
prayed for the day to pass quickly! In unutterable anguish I went to the
window, opened the movable pane and looked out into the troubled
darkness of the thickly falling wet snow. At last my wretched little
clock hissed out five. I seized my hat and trying not to look at
Apollon, who had been all day expecting his month's wages, but in his
foolishness was unwilling to be the first to speak about it, I slipt
between him and the door and jumping into a high-class sledge, on which
I spent my last half rouble, I drove up in grand style to the Hôtel de
Paris.


IV

I had been certain the day before that I should be the first to arrive.
But it was not a question of being the first to arrive. Not only were
they not there, but I had difficulty in finding our room. The table was
not laid even. What did it mean? After a good many questions I elicited
from the waiters that the dinner had been ordered not for five, but for
six o'clock. This was confirmed at the buffet too. I felt really ashamed
to go on questioning them. It was only twenty-five minutes past five. If
they changed the dinner hour they ought at least to have let me
know--that is what the post is for, and not to have put me in an absurd
position in my own eyes and ... and even before the waiters. I sat down;
the servant began laying the table; I felt even more humiliated when he
was present. Towards six o'clock they brought in candles, though there
were lamps burning in the room. It had not occurred to the waiter,
however, to bring them in at once when I arrived. In the next room two
gloomy, angry-looking persons were eating their dinners in silence at
two different tables. There was a great deal of noise, even shouting, in
a room further away; one could hear the laughter of a crowd of people,
and nasty little shrieks in French: there were ladies at the dinner. It
was sickening, in fact. I rarely passed more unpleasant moments, so much
so that when they did arrive all together punctually at six I was
overjoyed to see them, as though they were my deliverers, and even
forgot that it was incumbent upon me to show resentment.

Zverkov walked in at the head of them; evidently he was the leading
spirit. He and all of them were laughing; but, seeing me, Zverkov drew
himself up a little, walked up to me deliberately with a slight, rather
jaunty bend from the waist. He shook hands with me in a friendly, but
not over-friendly, fashion, with a sort of circumspect courtesy like
that of a General, as though in giving me his hand he were warding off
something. I had imagined, on the contrary, that on coming in he would
at once break into his habitual thin, shrill laugh and fall to making
his insipid jokes and witticisms. I had been preparing for them ever
since the previous day, but I had not expected such condescension, such
high-official courtesy. So, then, he felt himself ineffably superior to
me in every respect! If he only meant to insult me by that high-official
tone, it would not matter, I thought--I could pay him back for it one
way or another. But what if, in reality, without the least desire to be
offensive, that sheepshead had a notion in earnest that he was superior
to me and could only look at me in a patronizing way? The very
supposition made me gasp.

"I was surprised to hear of your desire to join us," he began, lisping
and drawling, which was something new. "You and I seem to have seen
nothing of one another. You fight shy of us. You shouldn't. We are not
such terrible people as you think. Well, anyway, I am glad to renew our
acquaintance."

And he turned carelessly to put down his hat on the window.

"Have you been waiting long?" Trudolyubov inquired.

"I arrived at five o'clock as you told me yesterday," I answered aloud,
with an irritability that threatened an explosion.

"Didn't you let him know that we had changed the hour?" said Trudolyubov
to Simonov.

"No, I didn't. I forgot," the latter replied, with no sign of regret,
and without even apologizing to me he went off to order the _hors
d'oeuvres_.

"So you've been here a whole hour? Oh, poor fellow!" Zverkov cried
ironically, for to his notions this was bound to be extremely funny.
That rascal Ferfitchkin followed with his nasty little snigger like a
puppy yapping. My position struck him, too, as exquisitely ludicrous and
embarrassing.

"It isn't funny at all!" I cried to Ferfitchkin, more and more
irritated. "It wasn't my fault, but other people's. They neglected to
let me know. It was ... it was ... it was simply absurd."

"It's not only absurd, but something else as well," muttered
Trudolyubov, naïvely taking my part. "You are not hard enough upon it.
It was simply rudeness--unintentional, of course. And how could Simonov
... h'm!"

"If a trick like that had been played on me," observed Ferfitchkin, "I
should...."

"But you should have ordered something for yourself," Zverkov
interrupted, "or simply asked for dinner without waiting for us."

"You will allow that I might have done that without your permission," I
rapped out. "If I waited, it was...."

"Let us sit down, gentlemen," cried Simonov, coming in. "Everything is
ready; I can answer for the champagne; it is capitally frozen.... You
see, I did not know your address, where was I to look for you?" he
suddenly turned to me, but again he seemed to avoid looking at me.
Evidently he had something against me. It must have been what happened
yesterday.

All sat down; I did the same. It was a round table. Trudolyubov was on
my left, Simonov on my right. Zverkov was sitting opposite, Ferfitchkin
next to him, between him and Trudolyubov.

"Tell me, are you ... in a government office?" Zverkov went on attending
to me. Seeing that I was embarrassed he seriously thought that he ought
to be friendly to me, and, so to speak, cheer me up.

"Does he want me to throw a bottle at his head?" I thought, in a fury.
In my novel surroundings I was unnaturally ready to be irritated.

"In the N---- office," I answered jerkily, with my eyes on my plate.

"And ha-ave you a go-od berth? I say, what ma-a-de you leave your
original job?"

"What ma-a-de me was that I wanted to leave my original job," I drawled
more than he, hardly able to control myself. Ferfitchkin went off into a
guffaw. Simonov looked at me ironically. Trudolyubov left off eating and
began looking at me with curiosity.

Zverkov winced, but he tried not to notice it.

"And the remuneration?"

"What remuneration?"

"I mean, your sa-a-lary?"

"Why are you cross-examining me?" However, I told him at once what my
salary was. I turned horribly red.

"It is not very handsome," Zverkov observed majestically.

"Yes, you can't afford to dine at cafés on that," Ferfitchkin added
insolently.

"To my thinking it's very poor," Trudolyubov observed gravely.

"And how thin you have grown! How you have changed!" added Zverkov, with
a shade of venom in his voice, scanning me and my attire with a sort of
insolent compassion.

"Oh, spare his blushes," cried Ferfitchkin, sniggering.

"My dear sir, allow me to tell you I am not blushing," I broke out at
last; "do you hear? I am dining here, at this café, at my own expense,
not at other people's--note that, Mr. Ferfitchkin."

"Wha-at? Isn't every one here dining at his own expense? You would seem
to be...." Ferfitchkin flew out at me, turning as red as a lobster, and
looking me in the face with fury.

"Tha-at," I answered, feeling I had gone too far, "and I imagine it
would be better to talk of something more intelligent."

"You intend to show off your intelligence, I suppose?"

"Don't disturb yourself, that would be quite out of place here."

"Why are you clacking away like that, my good sir, eh? Have you gone out
of your wits in your office?"

"Enough, gentlemen, enough!" Zverkov cried, authoritatively.

"How stupid it is!" muttered Simonov.

"It really is stupid. We have met here, a company of friends, for a
farewell dinner to a comrade and you carry on an altercation," said
Trudolyubov, rudely addressing himself to me alone. "You invited
yourself to join us, so don't disturb the general harmony."

"Enough, enough!" cried Zverkov. "Give over, gentlemen, it's out of
place. Better let me tell you how I nearly got married the day before
yesterday...."

And then followed a burlesque narrative of how this gentleman had almost
been married two days before. There was not a word about the marriage,
however, but the story was adorned with generals, colonels and
kammer-junkers, while Zverkov almost took the lead among them. It was
greeted with approving laughter; Ferfitchkin positively squealed.

No one paid any attention to me, and I sat crushed and humiliated.

"Good Heavens, these are not the people for me!" I thought. "And what a
fool I have made of myself before them! I let Ferfitchkin go too far,
though. The brutes imagine they are doing me an honour in letting me sit
down with them. They don't understand that it's an honour to them and
not to me! I've grown thinner! My clothes! Oh, damn my trousers! Zverkov
noticed the yellow stain on the knee as soon as he came in.... But
what's the use! I must get up at once, this very minute, take my hat and
simply go without a word ... with contempt! And to-morrow I can send a
challenge. The scoundrels! As though I cared about the seven roubles.
They may think.... Damn it! I don't care about the seven roubles. I'll
go this minute!"

Of course I remained. I drank sherry and Lafitte by the glassful in my
discomfiture. Being unaccustomed to it, I was quickly affected. My
annoyance increased as the wine went to my head. I longed all at once to
insult them all in a most flagrant manner and then go away. To seize the
moment and show what I could do, so that they would say, "He's clever,
though he is absurd," and ... and ... in fact, damn them all!

I scanned them all insolently with my drowsy eyes. But they seemed to
have forgotten me altogether. They were noisy, vociferous, cheerful.
Zverkov was talking all the time. I began listening. Zverkov was talking
of some exuberant lady whom he had at last led on to declaring her love
(of course, he was lying like a horse), and how he had been helped in
this affair by an intimate friend of his, a Prince Kolya, an officer in
the hussars, who had three thousand serfs.

"And yet this Kolya, who has three thousand serfs, has not put in an
appearance here to-night to see you off," I cut in suddenly.

For a minute every one was silent. "You are drunk already." Trudolyubov
deigned to notice me at last, glancing contemptuously in my direction.
Zverkov, without a word, examined me as though I were an insect. I
dropped my eyes. Simonov made haste to fill up the glasses with
champagne.

Trudolyubov raised his glass, as did every one else but me.

"Your health and good luck on the journey!" he cried to Zverkov. "To old
times, to our future, hurrah!"

They all tossed off their glasses, and crowded round Zverkov to kiss
him. I did not move; my full glass stood untouched before me.

"Why, aren't you going to drink it?" roared Trudolyubov, losing patience
and turning menacingly to me.

"I want to make a speech separately, on my own account ... and then I'll
drink it, Mr. Trudolyubov."

"Spiteful brute!" muttered Simonov. I drew myself up in my chair and
feverishly seized my glass, prepared for something extraordinary, though
I did not know myself precisely what I was going to say.

"_Silence!_" cried Ferfitchkin. "Now for a display of wit!"

Zverkov waited very gravely, knowing what was coming.

"Mr. Lieutenant Zverkov," I began, "let me tell you that I hate phrases,
phrasemongers and men in corsets ... that's the first point, and there
is a second one to follow it."

There was a general stir.

"The second point is: I hate ribaldry and ribald talkers. Especially
ribald talkers! The third point: I love justice, truth and honesty." I
went on almost mechanically, for I was beginning to shiver with horror
myself and had no idea how I came to be talking like this. "I love
thought, Monsieur Zverkov; I love true comradeship, on an equal footing
and not.... H'm ... I love.... But, however, why not? I will drink your
health, too, Mr. Zverkov. Seduce the Circassian girls, shoot the enemies
of the fatherland and ... and ... to your health, Monsieur Zverkov!"

Zverkov got up from his seat, bowed to me and said:

"I am very much obliged to you." He was frightfully offended and turned
pale.

"Damn the fellow!" roared Trudolyubov, bringing his fist down on the
table.

"Well, he wants a punch in the face for that," squealed Ferfitchkin.

"We ought to turn him out," muttered Simonov.

"Not a word, gentlemen, not a movement!" cried Zverkov solemnly,
checking the general indignation. "I thank you all, but I can show him
for myself how much value I attach to his words."

"Mr. Ferfitchkin, you will give me satisfaction to-morrow for your words
just now!" I said aloud, turning with dignity to Ferfitchkin.

"A duel, you mean? Certainly," he answered. But probably I was so
ridiculous as I challenged him and it was so out of keeping with my
appearance that everyone, including Ferfitchkin, was prostrate with
laughter.

"Yes, let him alone, of course! He is quite drunk," Trudolyubov said
with disgust.

"I shall never forgive myself for letting him join us," Simonov muttered
again.

"Now is the time to throw a bottle at their heads," I thought to myself.
I picked up the bottle ... and filled my glass.... "No, I'd better sit
on to the end," I went on thinking; "you would be pleased, my friends if
I went away. Nothing will induce me to go. I'll go on sitting here and
drinking to the end, on purpose, as a sign that I don't think you of the
slightest consequence. I will go on sitting and drinking, because this
is a public-house and I paid my entrance money. I'll sit here and drink,
for I look upon you as so many pawns, as inanimate pawns. I'll sit here
and drink ... and sing if I want to, yes, sing, for I have the right to
... to sing.... H'm!"

But I did not sing. I simply tried not to look at any of them. I assumed
most unconcerned attitudes and waited with impatience for them to speak
_first_. But alas, they did not address me! And oh, how I wished, how I
wished at that moment to be reconciled to them! It struck eight, at last
nine. They moved from the table to the sofa. Zverkov stretched himself
on a lounge and put one foot on a round table. Wine was brought there.
He did, as a fact, order three bottles on his own account. I, of course,
was not invited to join them. They all sat round him on the sofa. They
listened to him, almost with reverence. It was evident that they were
fond of him. "What for? What for?" I wondered. From time to time they
were moved to drunken enthusiasm and kissed each other. They talked of
the Caucasus, of the nature of true passion, of snug berths in the
service, of the income of an hussar called Podharzhevsky, whom none of
them knew personally, and rejoiced in the largeness of it, of the
extraordinary grace and beauty of a Princess D., whom none of them had
ever seen; then it came to Shakespeare's being immortal.

I smiled contemptuously and walked up and down the other side of the
room, opposite the sofa, from the table to the stove and back again. I
tried my very utmost to show them that I could do without them, and yet
I purposely made a noise with my boots, thumping with my heels. But it
was all in vain. They paid no attention. I had the patience to walk up
and down in front of them from eight o'clock till eleven, in the same
place, from the table to the stove and back again. "I walk up and down
to please myself and no one can prevent me." The waiter who came into
the room stopped, from time to time, to look at me. I was somewhat giddy
from turning round so often; at moments it seemed to me that I was in
delirium. During those three hours I was three times soaked with sweat
and dry again. At times, with an intense, acute pang I was stabbed to
the heart by the thought that ten years, twenty years, forty years would
pass, and that even in forty years I would remember with loathing and
humiliation those filthiest, most ludicrous, and most awful moments of
my life. No one could have gone out of his way to degrade himself more
shamelessly, and I fully realized it, fully, and yet I went on pacing up
and down from the table to the stove. "Oh, if you only knew what
thoughts and feelings I am capable of, how cultured I am!" I thought at
moments, mentally addressing the sofa on which my enemies were sitting.
But my enemies behaved as though I were not in the room. Once--only
once--they turned towards me, just when Zverkov was talking about
Shakespeare, and I suddenly gave a contemptuous laugh. I laughed in such
an affected and disgusting way that they all at once broke off their
conversation, and silently and gravely for two minutes watched me
walking up and down from the table to the stove, _taking no notice of
them_. But nothing came of it: they said nothing, and two minutes later
they ceased to notice me again. It struck eleven.

"Friends," cried Zverkov getting up from the sofa, "let us all be off
now, _there_!"

"Of course, of course," the others assented. I turned sharply to
Zverkov. I was so harassed, so exhausted, that I would have cut my
throat to put an end to it. I was in a fever; my hair, soaked with
perspiration, stuck to my forehead and temples.

"Zverkov, I beg your pardon," I said abruptly and resolutely.
"Ferfitchkin, yours too, and every one's, every one's: I have insulted
you all!"

"Aha! A duel is not in your line, old man," Ferfitchkin hissed
venomously.

It sent a sharp pang to my heart.

"No, it's not the duel I am afraid of, Ferfitchkin! I am ready to fight
you to-morrow, after we are reconciled. I insist upon it, in fact, and
you cannot refuse. I want to show you that I am not afraid of a duel.
You shall fire first and I shall fire into the air."

"He is comforting himself," said Simonov.

"He's simply raving," said Trudolyubov.

"But let us pass. Why are you barring our way? What do you want?"
Zverkov answered disdainfully.

They were all flushed; their eyes were bright: they had been drinking
heavily.

"I ask for your friendship, Zverkov; I insulted you, but...."

"Insulted? _You_ insulted _me_? Understand, sir, that you never, under
any circumstances, could possibly insult _me_."

"And that's enough for you. Out of the way!" concluded Trudolyubov.

"Olympia is mine, friends, that's agreed!" cried Zverkov.

"We won't dispute your right, we won't dispute your right," the others
answered, laughing.

I stood as though spat upon. The party went noisily out of the room.
Trudolyubov struck up some stupid song. Simonov remained behind for a
moment to tip the waiters. I suddenly went up to him.

"Simonov! give me six roubles!" I said, with desperate resolution.

He looked at me in extreme amazement, with vacant eyes. He, too, was
drunk.

"You don't mean you are coming with us?"

"Yes."

"I've no money," he snapped out, and with a scornful laugh he went out
of the room.

I clutched at his overcoat. It was a nightmare.

"Simonov, I saw you had money. Why do you refuse me? Am I a scoundrel?
Beware of refusing me: if you knew, if you knew why I am asking! My
whole future, my whole plans depend upon it!"

Simonov pulled out the money and almost flung it at me.

"Take it, if you have no sense of shame!" he pronounced pitilessly, and
ran to overtake them.

I was left for a moment alone. Disorder, the remains of dinner, a broken
wine-glass on the floor, spilt wine, cigarette ends, fumes of drink and
delirium in my brain, an agonizing misery in my heart and finally the
waiter, who had seen and heard all and was looking inquisitively into my
face.

"I am going there!" I cried. "Either they shall all go down on their
knees to beg for my friendship, or I will give Zverkov a slap in the
face!"


V

"So this is it, this is it at last--contact with real life," I muttered
as I ran headlong downstairs. "This is very different from the Pope's
leaving Rome and going to Brazil, very different from the ball on Lake
Como!"

"You are a scoundrel," a thought flashed through my mind, "if you laugh
at this now."

"No matter!" I cried, answering myself. "Now everything is lost!"

There was no trace to be seen of them, but that made no difference--I
knew where they had gone.

At the steps was standing a solitary night sledge-driver in a rough
peasant coat, powdered over with the still falling, wet, and as it were
warm, snow. It was hot and steamy. The little shaggy piebald horse was
also covered with snow and coughing, I remember that very well. I made a
rush for the roughly made sledge; but as soon as I raised my foot to get
into it, the recollection of how Simonov had just given me six roubles
seemed to double me up and I tumbled into the sledge like a sack.

"No, I must do a great deal to make up for all that," I cried. "But I
will make up for it or perish on the spot this very night. Start!"

We set off. There was a perfect whirl in my head.

"They won't go down on their knees to beg for my friendship. That is a
mirage, cheap mirage, revolting, romantic and fantastical--that's
another ball on Lake Como. And so I am bound to slap Zverkov's face! It
is my duty to. And so it is settled; I am flying to give him a slap in
the face. Hurry up!"

The driver tugged at the reins.

"As soon as I go in I'll give it him. Ought I before giving him the slap
to say a few words by way of preface? No. I'll simply go in and give it
him. They will all be sitting in the drawing-room, and he with Olympia
on the sofa. That damned Olympia! She laughed at my looks on one
occasion and refused me. I'll pull Olympia's hair, pull Zverkov's ears!
No, better one ear, and pull him by it round the room. Maybe they will
all begin beating me and will kick me out. That's most likely, indeed.
No matter! Anyway, I shall first slap him; the initiative will be mine;
and by the laws of honour that is everything: he will be branded and
cannot wipe off the slap by any blows, by nothing but a duel. He will be
forced to fight. And let them beat me now. Let them, the ungrateful
wretches! Trudolyubov will beat me hardest, he is so strong; Ferfitchkin
will be sure to catch hold sideways and tug at my hair. But no matter,
no matter! That's what I am going for. The blockheads will be forced at
last to see the tragedy of it all! When they drag me to the door I shall
call out to them that in reality they are not worth my little finger.
Get on, driver, get on!" I cried to the driver. He started and flicked
his whip, I shouted so savagely.

"We shall fight at daybreak, that's a settled thing. I've done with the
office. Ferfitchkin made a joke about it just now. But where can I get
pistols? Nonsense! I'll get my salary in advance and buy them. And
powder, and bullets? That's the second's business. And how can it all be
done by daybreak? And where am I to get a second? I have no friends.
Nonsense!" I cried, lashing myself up more and more. "It's of no
consequence! the first person I meet in the street is bound to be my
second, just as he would be bound to pull a drowning man out of water.
The most eccentric things may happen. Even if I were to ask the director
himself to be my second to-morrow, he would be bound to consent, if only
from a feeling of chivalry, and to keep the secret! Anton Antonitch...."

The fact is, that at that very minute the disgusting absurdity of my
plan and the other side of the question was clearer and more vivid to my
imagination than it could be to any one on earth. But....

"Get on, driver, get on, you rascal, get on!"

"Ugh, sir!" said the son of toil.

Cold shivers suddenly ran down me. Wouldn't it be better ... to go
straight home? My God, my God! Why did I invite myself to this dinner
yesterday? But no, it's impossible. And my walking up and down for three
hours from the table to the stove? No, they, they and no one else must
pay for my walking up and down! They must wipe out this dishonour! Drive
on!

And what if they give me into custody? They won't dare! They'll be
afraid of the scandal. And what if Zverkov is so contemptuous that he
refuses to fight a duel? He is sure to; but in that case I'll show them
... I will turn up at the posting station when he is setting off
to-morrow, I'll catch him by the leg, I'll pull off his coat when he
gets into the carriage. I'll get my teeth into his hand, I'll bite him.
"See what lengths you can drive a desperate man to!" He may hit me on
the head and they may belabour me from behind. I will shout to the
assembled multitude: "Look at this young puppy who is driving off to
captivate the Circassian girls after letting me spit in his face!"

Of course, after that everything will be over! The office will have
vanished off the face of the earth. I shall be arrested, I shall be
tried, I shall be dismissed from the service, thrown in prison, sent to
Siberia. Never mind! In fifteen years when they let me out of prison I
will trudge off to him, a beggar, in rags. I shall find him in some
provincial town. He will be married and happy. He will have a grown-up
daughter.... I shall say to him: "Look, monster, at my hollow cheeks and
my rags! I've lost everything--my career, my happiness, art, science,
_the woman I loved_, and all through you. Here are pistols. I have come
to discharge my pistol and ... and I ... forgive you. Then I shall fire
into the air and he will hear nothing more of me...."

I was actually on the point of tears, though I knew perfectly well at
that moment that all this was out of Pushkin's _Silvio_ and Lermontov's
_Masquerade_. And all at once I felt horribly ashamed, so ashamed that I
stopped the horse, got out of the sledge, and stood still in the snow in
the middle of the street. The driver gazed at me, sighing and
astonished.

What was I to do? I could not go on there--it was evidently stupid, and
I could not leave things as they were, because that would seem as
though.... Heavens, how could I leave things! And after such insults!
"No!" I cried, throwing myself into the sledge again. "It is ordained!
It is fate! Drive on, drive on!"

And in my impatience I punched the sledge-driver on the back of the
neck.

"What are you up to? What are you hitting me for?" the peasant shouted,
but he whipped up his nag so that it began kicking.

The wet snow was falling in big flakes; I unbuttoned myself, regardless
of it. I forgot everything else, for I had finally decided on the slap,
and felt with horror that it was going to happen _now, at once_, and
that _no force could stop it_. The deserted street lamps gleamed
sullenly in the snowy darkness like torches at a funeral. The snow
drifted under my great-coat, under my coat, under my cravat, and melted
there. I did not wrap myself up--all was lost, anyway.

At last we arrived. I jumped out, almost unconscious, ran up the steps
and began knocking and kicking at the door. I felt fearfully weak,
particularly in my legs and my knees. The door was opened quickly as
though they knew I was coming. As a fact, Simonov had warned them that
perhaps another gentleman would arrive, and this was a place in which
one had to give notice and to observe certain precautions. It was one of
those "millinery establishments" which were abolished by the police a
good time ago. By day it really was a shop; but at night, if one had an
introduction, one might visit it for other purposes.

I walked rapidly through the dark shop into the familiar drawing-room,
where there was only one candle burning, and stood still in amazement:
there was no one there. "Where are they?" I asked somebody. But by now,
of course, they had separated. Before me was standing a person with a
stupid smile, the "madam" herself, who had seen me before. A minute
later a door opened and another person came in.

Taking no notice of anything I strode about the room, and, I believe, I
talked to myself. I felt as though I had been saved from death and was
conscious of this, joyfully, all over: I should have given that slap, I
should certainly, certainly have given it! But now they were not here
and ... everything had vanished and changed! I looked round. I could not
realize my condition yet. I looked mechanically at the girl who had come
in: and had a glimpse of a fresh, young, rather pale face, with
straight, dark eyebrows, and with grave, as it were wondering, eyes that
attracted me at once; I should have hated her if she had been smiling. I
began looking at her more intently and, as it were, with effort. I had
not fully collected my thoughts. There was something simple and
good-natured in her face, but something strangely grave. I am sure that
this stood in her way here, and no one of those fools had noticed her.
She could not, however, have been called a beauty, though she was tall,
strong-looking, and well built. She was very simply dressed. Something
loathsome stirred within me. I went straight up to her.

I chanced to look into the glass. My harassed face struck me as
revolting in the extreme, pale, angry, abject, with dishevelled hair.
"No matter, I am glad of it," I thought; "I am glad that I shall seem
repulsive to her; I like that."


VI

... Somewhere behind a screen a clock began wheezing, as though
oppressed by something, as though some one were strangling it. After an
unnaturally prolonged wheezing there followed a shrill, nasty, and as it
were unexpectedly rapid, chime--as though some one were suddenly jumping
forward. It struck two. I woke up, though I had indeed not been asleep
but lying half conscious.

It was almost completely dark in the narrow, cramped, low-pitched room,
cumbered up with an enormous wardrobe and piles of cardboard boxes and
all sorts of frippery and litter. The candle end that had been burning
on the table was going out and gave a faint flicker from time to time.
In a few minutes there would be complete darkness.

I was not long in coming to myself; everything came back to my mind at
once, without an effort, as though it had been in ambush to pounce upon
me again. And, indeed, even while I was unconscious a point seemed
continually to remain in my memory unforgotten, and round it my dreams
moved drearily. But strange to say, everything that had happened to me
in that day seemed to me now, on waking, to be in the far, far away
past, as though I had long, long ago lived all that down.

My head was full of fumes. Something seemed to be hovering over me,
rousing me, exciting me, and making me restless. Misery and spite seemed
surging up in me again and seeking an outlet. Suddenly I saw beside me
two wide open eyes scrutinizing me curiously and persistently. The look
in those eyes was coldly detached, sullen, as it were utterly remote; it
weighed upon me.

A grim idea came into my brain and passed all over my body, as a
horrible sensation, such as one feels when one goes into a damp and
mouldy cellar. There was something unnatural in those two eyes,
beginning to look at me only now. I recalled, too, that during those two
hours I had not said a single word to this creature, and had, in fact,
considered it utterly superfluous; in fact, the silence had for some
reason gratified me. Now I suddenly realized vividly the hideous
idea--revolting as a spider--of vice, which, without love, grossly and
shamelessly begins with that in which true love finds its consummation.
For a long time we gazed at each other like that, but she did not drop
her eyes before mine and her expression did not change, so that at last
I felt uncomfortable.

"What is your name?" I asked abruptly, to put an end to it.

"Liza," she answered almost in a whisper, but somehow far from
graciously, and she turned her eyes away.

I was silent.

"What weather! The snow ... it's disgusting!" I said, almost to myself,
putting my arm under my head despondently, and gazing at the ceiling.

She made no answer. This was horrible.

"Have you always lived in Petersburg?" I asked a minute later, almost
angrily, turning my head slightly towards her.

"No."

"Where do you come from?"

"From Riga," she answered reluctantly.

"Are you a German?"

"No, Russian."

"Have you been here long?"

"Where?"

"In this house?"

"A fortnight."

She spoke more and more jerkily. The candle went out; I could no longer
distinguish her face.

"Have you a father and mother?"

"Yes ... no ... I have."

"Where are they?"

"There ... in Riga."

"What are they?"

"Oh, nothing."

"Nothing? Why, what class are they?"

"Tradespeople."

"Have you always lived with them?"

"Yes."

"How old are you?"

"Twenty."

"Why did you leave them?"

"Oh, for no reason."

That answer meant "Let me alone; I feel sick, sad."

We were silent.

God knows why I did not go away. I felt myself more and more sick and
dreary. The images of the previous day began of themselves, apart from
my will, flitting through my memory in confusion. I suddenly recalled
something I had seen that morning when, full of anxious thoughts, I was
hurrying to the office.

"I saw them carrying a coffin out yesterday and they nearly dropped it,"
I suddenly said aloud, not that I desired to open the conversation, but
as it were by accident.

"A coffin?"

"Yes, in the Haymarket; they were bringing it up out of a cellar."

"From a cellar?"

"Not from a cellar, but from a basement. Oh, you know ... down below ...
from a house of ill-fame. It was filthy all round.... Egg-shells, litter
... a stench. It was loathsome."

Silence.

"A nasty day to be buried," I began, simply to avoid being silent.

"Nasty, in what way?"

"The snow, the wet." (I yawned.)

"It makes no difference," she said suddenly, after a brief silence.

"No, it's horrid." (I yawned again.) "The gravediggers must have sworn
at getting drenched by the snow. And there must have been water in the
grave."

"Why water in the grave?" she asked, with a sort of curiosity, but
speaking even more harshly and abruptly than before.

I suddenly began to feel provoked.

"Why, there must have been water at the bottom a foot deep. You can't
dig a dry grave in Volkovo Cemetery."

"Why?"

"Why? Why, the place is waterlogged. It's a regular marsh. So they bury
them in water. I've seen it myself ... many times."

(I had never seen it once, indeed I had never been in Volkovo, and had
only heard stories of it.)

"Do you mean to say, you don't mind how you die?"

"But why should I die?" she answered, as though defending herself.

"Why, some day you will die, and you will die just the same as that dead
woman. She was ... a girl like you. She died of consumption."

"A wench would have died in hospital...." (She knows all about it
already: she said "wench," not "girl.")

"She was in debt to her madam," I retorted, more and more provoked by
the discussion; "and went on earning money for her up to the end, though
she was in consumption. Some sledge-drivers standing by were talking
about her to some soldiers and telling them so. No doubt they knew her.
They were laughing. They were going to meet in a pot-house to drink to
her memory."

A great deal of this was my invention. Silence followed, profound
silence. She did not stir.

"And is it better to die in a hospital?"

"Isn't it just the same? Besides, why should I die?" she added
irritably.

"If not now, a little later."

"Why a little later?"

"Why, indeed? Now you are young, pretty, fresh, you fetch a high price.
But after another year of this life you will be very different--you will
go off."

"In a year?"

"Anyway, in a year you will be worth less," I continued malignantly.
"You will go from here to something lower, another house; a year
later--to a third, lower and lower, and in seven years you will come to
a basement in the Haymarket. That will be if you were lucky. But it
would be much worse if you got some disease, consumption, say ... and
caught a chill, or something or other. It's not easy to get over an
illness in your way of life. If you catch anything you may not get rid
of it. And so you would die."

"Oh, well, then I shall die," she answered, quite vindictively, and she
made a quick movement.

"But one is sorry."

"Sorry for whom?"

"Sorry for life."

Silence.

"Have you been engaged to be married? Eh?"

"What's that to you?"

"Oh, I am not cross-examining you. It's nothing to me. Why are you so
cross? Of course you may have had your own troubles. What is it to me?
It's simply that I felt sorry."

"Sorry for whom?"

"Sorry for you."

"No need," she whispered hardly audibly, and again made a faint
movement.

That incensed me at once. What! I was so gentle with her, and she....

"Why, do you think that you are on the right path?"

"I don't think anything."

"That's what's wrong, that you don't think. Realize it while there is
still time. There still is time. You are still young, good-looking; you
might love, be married, be happy...."

"Not all married women are happy," she snapped out in the rude abrupt
tone she had used at first.

"Not all, of course, but anyway it is much better than the life here.
Infinitely better. Besides, with love one can live even without
happiness. Even in sorrow life is sweet; life is sweet, however one
lives. But here what is there but ... foulness. Phew!"

I turned away with disgust; I was no longer reasoning coldly. I began to
feel myself what I was saying and warmed to the subject. I was already
longing to expound the cherished ideas I had brooded over in my corner.
Something suddenly flared up in me. An object had appeared before me.

"Never mind my being here, I am not an example for you. I am, perhaps,
worse than you are. I was drunk when I came here, though," I hastened,
however, to say in self-defence. "Besides, a man is no example for a
woman. It's a different thing. I may degrade and defile myself, but I am
not any one's slave. I come and go, and that's an end of it. I shake it
off, and I am a different man. But you are a slave from the start. Yes,
a slave! You give up everything, your whole freedom. If you want to
break your chains afterwards, you won't be able to: you will be more and
more fast in the snares. It is an accursed bondage. I know it. I won't
speak of anything else, maybe you won't understand, but tell me: no
doubt you are in debt to your madam? There, you see," I added, though
she made no answer, but only listened in silence, entirely absorbed,
"that's a bondage for you! You will never buy your freedom. They will
see to that. It's like selling your soul to the devil.... And besides
... perhaps I, too, am just as unlucky--how do you know--and wallow in
the mud on purpose, out of misery? You know, men take to drink from
grief; well, maybe I am here from grief. Come, tell me, what is there
good here? Here you and I ... came together ... just now and did not say
one word to one another all the time, and it was only afterwards you
began staring at me like a wild creature, and I at you. Is that loving?
Is that how one human being should meet another? It's hideous, that's
what it is!"

"Yes!" she assented sharply and hurriedly.

I was positively astounded by the promptitude of this "Yes." So the same
thought may have been straying through her mind when she was staring at
me just before. So she, too, was capable of certain thoughts? "Damn it
all, this was interesting, this was a point of likeness!" I thought,
almost rubbing my hands. And indeed it's easy to turn a young soul like
that!

It was the exercise of my power that attracted me most.

She turned her head nearer to me, and it seemed to me in the darkness
that she propped herself on her arm. Perhaps she was scrutinizing me.
How I regretted that I could not see her eyes. I heard her deep
breathing.

"Why have you come here?" I asked her, with a note of authority already
in my voice.

"Oh, I don't know."

"But how nice it would be to be living in your father's house! It's warm
and free; you have a home of your own."

"But what if it's worse than this?"

"I must take the right tone," flashed through my mind. "I may not get
far with sentimentality." But it was only a momentary thought. I swear
she really did interest me. Besides, I was exhausted and moody. And
cunning so easily goes hand-in-hand with feeling.

"Who denies it!" I hastened to answer. "Anything may happen. I am
convinced that some one has wronged you, and that you are more sinned
against than sinning. Of course, I know nothing of your story, but it's
not likely a girl like you has come here of her own inclination...."

"A girl like me?" she whispered, hardly audibly; but I heard it.

Damn it all, I was flattering her. That was horrid. But perhaps it was a
good thing.... She was silent.

"See, Liza, I will tell you about myself. If I had had a home from
childhood, I shouldn't be what I am now. I often think that. However bad
it may be at home, anyway they are your father and mother, and not
enemies, strangers. Once a year at least, they'll show their love of
you. Anyway, you know you are at home. I grew up without a home; and
perhaps that's why I've turned so ... unfeeling."

I waited again. "Perhaps she doesn't understand," I thought, "and,
indeed, it is absurd--it's moralizing."

"If I were a father and had a daughter, I believe I should love my
daughter more than my sons, really," I began indirectly, as though
talking of something else, to distract her attention. I must confess I
blushed.

"Why so?" she asked.

Ah! so she was listening!

"I don't know, Liza. I knew a father who was a stern, austere man, but
used to go down on his knees to his daughter, used to kiss her hands,
her feet, he couldn't make enough of her, really. When she danced at
parties he used to stand for five hours at a stretch, gazing at her. He
was mad over her: I understand that! She would fall asleep tired at
night, and he would wake to kiss her in her sleep and make the sign of
the cross over her. He would go about in a dirty old coat, he was stingy
to every one else, but would spend his last penny for her, giving her
expensive presents, and it was his greatest delight when she was pleased
with what he gave her. Fathers always love their daughters more than the
mothers do. Some girls live happily at home! And I believe I should
never let my daughters marry."

"What next?" she said, with a faint smile.

"I should be jealous, I really should. To think that she should kiss any
one else! That she should love a stranger more than her father! It's
painful to imagine it. Of course, that's all nonsense, of course every
father would be reasonable at last. But I believe before I should let
her marry, I should worry myself to death; I should find fault with all
her suitors. But I should end by letting her marry whom she herself
loved. The one whom the daughter loves always seems the worst to the
father, you know. That is always so. So many family troubles come from
that."

"Some are glad to sell their daughters, rather than marrying them
honourably."

Ah, so that was it!

"Such a thing, Liza, happens in those accursed families in which there
is neither love nor God," I retorted warmly, "and where there is no
love, there is no sense either. There are such families, it's true, but
I am not speaking of them. You must have seen wickedness in your own
family, if you talk like that. Truly, you must have been unlucky. H'm!
... that sort of thing mostly comes about through poverty."

"And is it any better with the gentry? Even among the poor, honest
people live happily."

"H'm ... yes. Perhaps. Another thing, Liza, man is fond of reckoning up
his troubles, but does not count his joys. If he counted them up as he
ought, he would see that every lot has enough happiness provided for it.
And what if all goes well with the family, if the blessing of God is
upon it, if the husband is a good one, loves you, cherishes you, never
leaves you! There is happiness in such a family! Even sometimes there is
happiness in the midst of sorrow; and indeed sorrow is everywhere. If
you marry _you will find out for yourself_. But think of the first years
of married life with one you love: what happiness, what happiness there
sometimes is in it! And indeed it's the ordinary thing. In those early
days even quarrels with one's husband end happily. Some women get up
quarrels with their husbands just because they love them. Indeed, I knew
a woman like that: she seemed to say that because she loved him, she
would torment him and make him feel it. You know that you may torment a
man on purpose through love. Women are particularly given to that,
thinking to themselves 'I will love him so, I will make so much of him
afterwards, that it's no sin to torment him a little now.' And all in
the house rejoice in the sight of you, and you are happy and gay and
peaceful and honourable.... Then there are some women who are jealous.
If he went off anywhere--I knew one such woman, she couldn't restrain
herself, but would jump up at night and run off on the sly to find out
where he was, whether he was with some other woman. That's a pity. And
the woman knows herself it's wrong, and her heart fails her and she
suffers, but she loves--it's all through love. And how sweet it is to
make it up after quarrels, to own herself in the wrong or to forgive
him! And they are both so happy all at once--as though they had met
anew, been married over again; as though their love had begun afresh.
And no one, no one should know what passes between husband and wife if
they love one another. And whatever quarrels there may be between them
they ought not to call in their own mother to judge between them and
tell tales of one another. They are their own judges. Love is a holy
mystery and ought to be hidden from all other eyes, whatever happens.
That makes it holier and better. They respect one another more, and much
is built on respect. And if once there has been love, if they have been
married for love, why should love pass away? Surely one can keep it! It
is rare that one cannot keep it. And if the husband is kind and
straightforward, why should not love last? The first phase of married
love will pass, it is true, but then there will come a love that is
better still. Then there will be the union of souls, they will have
everything in common, there will be no secrets between them. And once
they have children, the most difficult times will seem to them happy, so
long as there is love and courage. Even toil will be a joy, you may deny
yourself bread for your children and even that will be a joy. They will
love you for it afterwards; so you are laying by for your future. As the
children grow up you feel that you are an example, a support for them;
that even after you die your children will always keep your thoughts and
feelings, because they have received them from you, they will take on
your semblance and likeness. So you see this is a great duty. How can it
fail to draw the father and mother nearer? People say it's a trial to
have children. Who says that? It is heavenly happiness! Are you fond of
little children, Liza? I am awfully fond of them. You know--a little
rosy baby boy at your bosom, and what husband's heart is not touched,
seeing his wife nursing his child! A plump little rosy baby, sprawling
and snuggling, chubby little hands and feet, clean tiny little nails, so
tiny that it makes one laugh to look at them; eyes that look as if they
understand everything. And while it sucks it clutches at your bosom with
its little hand, plays. When its father comes up, the child tears itself
away from the bosom, flings itself back, looks at its father, laughs, as
though it were fearfully funny and falls to sucking again. Or it will
bite its mother's breast when its little teeth are coming, while it
looks sideways at her with its little eyes as though to say, 'Look, I am
biting!' Is not all that happiness when they are the three together,
husband, wife and child? One can forgive a great deal for the sake of
such moments. Yes, Liza, one must first learn to live oneself before one
blames others!"

"It's by pictures, pictures like that one must get at you," I thought to
myself, though I did speak with real feeling, and all at once I flushed
crimson. "What if she were suddenly to burst out laughing, what should I
do then?" That idea drove me to fury. Towards the end of my speech I
really was excited, and now my vanity was somehow wounded. The silence
continued. I almost nudged her.

"Why are you----" she began and stopped. But I understood: there was a
quiver of something different in her voice, not abrupt, harsh and
unyielding as before, but something soft and shamefaced, so shamefaced
that I suddenly felt ashamed and guilty.

"What?" I asked, with tender curiosity.

"Why, you...."

"What?"

"Why, you ... speak somehow like a book," she said, and again there was
a note of irony in her voice.

That remark sent a pang to my heart. It was not what I was expecting.

I did not understand that she was hiding her feelings under irony, that
this is usually the last refuge of modest and chaste-souled people when
the privacy of their soul is coarsely and intrusively invaded, and that
their pride makes them refuse to surrender till the last moment and
shrink from giving expression to their feelings before you. I ought to
have guessed the truth from the timidity with which she had repeatedly
approached her sarcasm, only bringing herself to utter it at last with
an effort. But I did not guess, and an evil feeling took possession of
me.

"Wait a bit!" I thought.


VII

"Oh, hush, Liza! How can you talk about being like a book, when it makes
even me, an outsider, feel sick? Though I don't look at it as an
outsider, for, indeed, it touches me to the heart.... Is it possible, is
it possible that you do not feel sick at being here yourself? Evidently
habit does wonders! God knows what habit can do with any one. Can you
seriously think that you will never grow old, that you will always be
good-looking, and that they will keep you here for ever and ever? I say
nothing of the loathsomeness of the life here.... Though let me tell you
this about it--about your present life, I mean; here though you are
young now, attractive, nice, with soul and feeling, yet you know as soon
as I came to myself just now I felt at once sick at being here with you!
One can only come here when one is drunk. But if you were anywhere else,
living as good people live, I should perhaps be more than attracted by
you, should fall in love with you, should be glad of a look from you,
let alone a word; I should hang about your door, should go down on my
knees to you, should look upon you as my betrothed and think it an
honour to be allowed to. I should not dare to have an impure thought
about you. But here, you see, I know that I have only to whistle and you
have to come with me whether you like it or not. I don't consult your
wishes, but you mine. The lowest labourer hires himself as a workman but
he doesn't make a slave of himself altogether; besides, he knows that he
will be free again presently. But when are you free? Only think what you
are giving up here? What is it you are making a slave of? It is your
soul, together with your body; you are selling your soul which you have
no right to dispose of! You give your love to be outraged by every
drunkard! Love! But that's everything, you know, it's a priceless
diamond, it's a maiden's treasure, love--why, a man would be ready to
give his soul, to face death to gain that love. But how much is your
love worth now? You are sold, all of you, body and soul, and there is no
need to strive for love when you can have everything without love. And
you know there is no greater insult to a girl than that, do you
understand? To be sure, I have heard that they comfort you, poor fools,
they let you have lovers of your own here. But you know that's simply a
farce, that's simply a sham, it's just laughing at you, and you are
taken in by it! Why, do you suppose he really loves you, that lover of
yours? I don't believe it. How can he love you when he knows you may be
called away from him any minute? He would be a low fellow if he did!
Will he have a grain of respect for you? What have you in common with
him? He laughs at you and robs you--that is all his love amounts to! You
are lucky if he does not beat you. Very likely he does beat you, too.
Ask him, if you have got one, whether he will marry you. He will laugh
in your face, if he doesn't spit in it or give you a blow--though maybe
he is not worth a bad halfpenny himself. And for what have you ruined
your life, if you come to think of it? For the coffee they give you to
drink and the plentiful meals? But with what object are they feeding you
up? An honest girl couldn't swallow the food, for she would know what
she was being fed for. You are in debt here, and, of course, you will
always be in debt, and you will go on in debt to the end, till the
visitors here begin to scorn you. And that will soon happen, don't rely
upon your youth--all that flies by express train here, you know. You
will be kicked out. And not simply kicked out; long before that she'll
begin nagging at you, scolding you, abusing you, as though you had not
sacrificed your health for her, had not thrown away your youth and your
soul for her benefit, but as though you had ruined her, beggared her,
robbed her. And don't expect any one to take your part: the others, your
companions, will attack you, too, to win her favour, for all are in
slavery here, and have lost all conscience and pity here long ago. They
have become utterly vile, and nothing on earth is viler, more loathsome,
and more insulting than their abuse. And you are laying down everything
here, unconditionally, youth and health and beauty and hope, and at
twenty-two you will look like a woman of five-and-thirty, and you will
be lucky if you are not diseased, pray to God for that! No doubt you are
thinking now that you have a gay time and no work to do! Yet there is no
work harder or more dreadful in the world or ever has been. One would
think that the heart alone would be worn out with tears. And you won't
dare to say a word, not half a word when they drive you away from here;
you will go away as though you were to blame. You will change to another
house, then to a third, then somewhere else, till you come down at last
to the Haymarket. There you will be beaten at every turn; that is good
manners there, the visitors don't know how to be friendly without
beating you. You don't believe that it is so hateful there? Go and look
for yourself some time, you can see with your own eyes. Once, one New
Year's Day, I saw a woman at a door. They had turned her out as a joke,
to give her a taste of the frost because she had been crying so much,
and they shut the door behind her. At nine o'clock in the morning she
was already quite drunk, dishevelled, half-naked, covered with bruises,
her face was powdered, but she had a black eye, blood was trickling from
her nose and her teeth; some cabman had just given her a drubbing. She
was sitting on the stone steps, a salt fish of some sort was in her
hand; she was crying, wailing something about her luck and beating with
the fish on the steps, and cabmen and drunken soldiers were crowding in
the doorway taunting her. You don't believe that you will ever be like
that? I should be sorry to believe it, too, but how do you know; maybe
ten years, eight years ago that very woman with the salt fish came here
fresh as a cherub, innocent, pure, knowing no evil, blushing at every
word. Perhaps she was like you, proud, ready to take offence, not like
the others; perhaps she looked like a queen, and knew what happiness was
in store for the man who should love her and whom she should love. Do
you see how it ended? And what if at that very minute when she was
beating on the filthy steps with that fish, drunken and
dishevelled--what if at that very minute she recalled the pure early
days in her father's house, when she used to go to school and the
neighbour's son watched for her on the way, declaring that he would love
her as long as he lived, that he would devote his life to her, and when
they vowed to love one another for ever and be married as soon as they
were grown up! No, Liza, it would be happy for you if you were to die
soon of consumption in some corner, in some cellar like that woman just
now. In the hospital, do you say? You will be lucky if they take you,
but what if you are still of use to the madam here? Consumption is a
queer disease, it is not like fever. The patient goes on hoping till the
last minute and says he is all right. He deludes himself. And that just
suits your madam. Don't doubt it, that's how it is; you have sold your
soul, and what is more you owe money, so you daren't say a word. But
when you are dying, all will abandon you, all will turn away from you,
for then there will be nothing to get from you. What's more, they will
reproach you for cumbering the place, for being so long over dying.
However you beg you won't get a drink of water without abuse: 'Whenever
are you going off, you nasty hussy, you won't let us sleep with your
moaning, you make the gentlemen sick.' That's true, I have heard such
things said myself. They will thrust you dying into the filthiest corner
in the cellar--in the damp and darkness; what will your thoughts be,
lying there alone? When you die, strange hands will lay you out, with
grumbling and impatience; no one will bless you, no one will sigh for
you, they only want to get rid of you as soon as may be; they will buy a
coffin, take you to the grave as they did that poor woman to-day, and
celebrate your memory at the tavern. In the grave sleet, filth, wet
snow--no need to put themselves out for you--'Let her down, Vanuha; it's
just like her luck--even here, she is head-foremost, the hussy. Shorten
the cord, you rascal.' 'It's all right as it is.' 'All right, is it?
Why, she's on her side! She was a fellow-creature, after all! But, never
mind, throw the earth on her.' And they won't care to waste much time
quarrelling over you. They will scatter the wet blue clay as quick as
they can and go off to the tavern ... and there your memory on earth
will end; other women have children to go to their graves, fathers,
husbands. While for you neither tear, nor sigh, nor remembrance; no one
in the whole world will ever come to you, your name will vanish from the
face of the earth--as though you had never existed, never been born at
all! Nothing but filth and mud, however you knock at your coffin lid at
night, when the dead arise, however you cry: 'Let me out, kind people,
to live in the light of day! My life was no life at all; my life has
been thrown away like a dish-clout; it was drunk away in the tavern at
the Haymarket; let me out, kind people, to live in the world again.'"

And I worked myself up to such a pitch that I began to have a lump in my
throat myself, and ... and all at once I stopped, sat up in dismay, and
bending over apprehensively, began to listen with a beating heart. I had
reason to be troubled.

I had felt for some time that I was turning her soul upside down and
rending her heart, and--and the more I was convinced of it, the more
eagerly I desired to gain my object as quickly and as effectually as
possible. It was the exercise of my skill that carried me away; yet it
was not merely sport....

I knew I was speaking stiffly, artificially, even bookishly, in fact, I
could not speak except "like a book." But that did not trouble me: I
knew, I felt that I should be understood and that this very bookishness
might be an assistance. But now, having attained my effect, I was
suddenly panic-stricken. Never before had I witnessed such despair! She
was lying on her face, thrusting her face into the pillow and clutching
it in both hands. Her heart was being torn. Her youthful body was
shuddering all over as though in convulsions. Suppressed sobs rent her
bosom and suddenly burst out in weeping and wailing, then she pressed
closer into the pillow: she did not want any one here, not a living
soul, to know of her anguish and her tears. She bit the pillow, bit her
hand till it bled (I saw that afterwards), or, thrusting her fingers
into her dishevelled hair seemed rigid with the effort of restraint,
holding her breath and clenching her teeth. I began saying something,
begging her to calm herself, but felt that I did not dare; and all at
once, in a sort of cold shiver, almost in terror, began fumbling in the
dark, trying hurriedly to get dressed to go. It was dark: though I tried
my best I could not finish dressing quickly. Suddenly I felt a box of
matches and a candlestick with a whole candle in it. As soon as the room
was lighted up, Liza sprang up, sat up in bed, and with a contorted
face, with a half insane smile, looked at me almost senselessly. I sat
down beside her and took her hands; she came to herself, made an
impulsive movement towards me, would have caught hold of me, but did not
dare, and slowly bowed her head before me.

"Liza, my dear, I was wrong ... forgive me, my dear," I began, but she
squeezed my hand in her fingers so tightly that I felt I was saying the
wrong thing and stopped.

"This is my address, Liza, come to me."

"I will come," she answered resolutely, her head still bowed.

"But now I am going, good-bye ... till we meet again."

I got up; she, too, stood up and suddenly flushed all over, gave a
shudder, snatched up a shawl that was lying on a chair and muffled
herself in it to her chin. As she did this she gave another sickly
smile, blushed and looked at me strangely. I felt wretched; I was in
haste to get away--to disappear.

"Wait a minute," she said suddenly, in the passage just at the doorway,
stopping me with her hand on my overcoat. She put down the candle in hot
haste and ran off; evidently she had thought of something or wanted to
show me something. As she ran away she flushed, her eyes shone, and
there was a smile on her lips--what was the meaning of it? Against my
will I waited: she came back a minute later with an expression that
seemed to ask forgiveness for something. In fact, it was not the same
face, not the same look as the evening before: sullen, mistrustful and
obstinate. Her eyes now were imploring, soft, and at the same time
trustful, caressing, timid. The expression with which children look at
people they are very fond of, of whom they are asking a favour. Her eyes
were a light hazel, they were lovely eyes, full of life, and capable of
expressing love as well as sullen hatred.

Making no explanation, as though I, as a sort of higher being, must
understand everything without explanations, she held out a piece of
paper to me. Her whole face was positively beaming at that instant with
naïve, almost childish, triumph. I unfolded it. It was a letter to her
from a medical student or some one of that sort--a very high-flown and
flowery, but extremely respectful, love-letter. I don't recall the words
now, but I remember well that through the high-flown phrases there was
apparent a genuine feeling, which cannot be feigned. When I had finished
reading it I met her glowing, questioning, and childishly impatient eyes
fixed upon me. She fastened her eyes upon my face and waited impatiently
for what I should say. In a few words, hurriedly, but with a sort of joy
and pride, she explained to me that she had been to a dance somewhere in
a private house, a family of "very nice people, _who knew nothing_,
absolutely nothing, for she had only come here so lately and it had all
happened ... and she hadn't made up her mind to stay and was certainly
going away as soon as she had paid her debt ... and at that party there
had been the student who had danced with her all the evening. He had
talked to her, and it turned out that he had known her in old days at
Riga when he was a child, they had played together, but a very long time
ago--and he knew her parents, but _about this_ he knew nothing, nothing
whatever, and had no suspicion! And the day after the dance (three days
ago) he had sent her that letter through the friend with whom she had
gone to the party ... and ... well, that was all."

She dropped her shining eyes with a sort of bashfulness as she finished.

The poor girl was keeping that student's letter as a precious treasure,
and had run to fetch it, her only treasure, because she did not want me
to go away without knowing that she, too, was honestly and genuinely
loved; that she, too, was addressed respectfully. No doubt that letter
was destined to lie in her box and lead to nothing. But none the less, I
am certain that she would keep it all her life as a precious treasure,
as her pride and justification, and now at such a minute she had thought
of that letter and brought it with naïve pride to raise herself in my
eyes that I might see, that I, too, might think well of her. I said
nothing, pressed her hand and went out. I so longed to get away.... I
walked all the way home, in spite of the fact that the melting snow was
still falling in heavy flakes. I was exhausted, shattered, in
bewilderment. But behind the bewilderment the truth was already
gleaming. The loathsome truth.


VIII

It was some time, however, before I consented to recognize that truth.
Waking up in the morning after some hours of heavy, leaden sleep, and
immediately realizing all that had happened on the previous day, I was
positively amazed at my last night's _sentimentality_ with Liza, at all
those "outcries of horror and pity." "To think of having such an attack
of womanish hysteria, pah!" I concluded. And what did I thrust my
address upon her for? What if she comes? Let her come, though; it
doesn't matter.... But _obviously_, that was not now the chief and the
most important matter: I had to make haste and at all costs save my
reputation in the eyes of Zverkov and Simonov as quickly as possible;
that was the chief business. And I was so taken up that morning that I
actually forgot all about Liza.

First of all I had at once to repay what I had borrowed the day before
from Simonov. I resolved on a desperate measure: to borrow fifteen
roubles straight off from Anton Antonitch. As luck would have it he was
in the best of humours that morning, and gave it to me at once, on the
first asking. I was so delighted at this that, as I signed the I O U
with a swaggering air, I told him casually that the night before "I had
been keeping it up with some friends at the Hôtel de Paris; we were
giving a farewell party to a comrade, in fact, I might say a friend of
my childhood, and you know--a desperate rake, fearfully spoilt--of
course, he belongs to a good family, and has considerable means, a
brilliant career; he is witty, charming, a regular Lovelace, you
understand; we drank an extra 'half-dozen' and...."

And it went off all right; all this was uttered very easily,
unconstrainedly and complacently.

On reaching home I promptly wrote to Simonov.

To this hour I am lost in admiration when I recall the truly
gentlemanly, good-humoured, candid tone of my letter. With tact and
good-breeding, and, above all, entirely without superfluous words, I
blamed myself for all that had happened. I defended myself, "if I really
may be allowed to defend myself," by alleging that being utterly
unaccustomed to wine, I had been intoxicated with the first glass, which
I said, I had drunk before they arrived, while I was waiting for them at
the Hôtel de Paris between five and six o'clock. I begged Simonov's
pardon especially; I asked him to convey my explanations to all the
others, especially to Zverkov, whom "I seemed to remember as though in a
dream" I had insulted. I added that I would have called upon all of them
myself, but my head ached, and besides I had not the face to. I was
particularly pleased with a certain lightness, almost carelessness
(strictly within the bounds of politeness, however), which was apparent
in my style, and better than any possible arguments, gave them at once
to understand that I took rather an independent view of "all that
unpleasantness last night;" that I was by no means so utterly crushed as
you, my friends, probably imagine; but on the contrary, looked upon it
as a gentleman serenely respecting himself should look upon it. "On a
young hero's past no censure is cast!"

"There is actually an aristocratic playfulness about it!" I thought
admiringly, as I read over the letter. And it's all because I am an
intellectual and cultivated man! Another man in my place would not have
known how to extricate himself, but here I have got out of it and am as
jolly as ever again, and all because I am "a cultivated and educated man
of our day." And, indeed, perhaps, everything was due to the wine
yesterday. H'm! ... no, it was not the wine. I did not drink anything at
all between five and six when I was waiting for them. I had lied to
Simonov; I had lied shamelessly; and indeed I wasn't ashamed now....
Hang it all though, the great thing was that I was rid of it.

I put six roubles in the letter, sealed it up, and asked Apollon to take
it to Simonov. When he learned that there was money in the letter,
Apollon became more respectful and agreed to take it. Towards evening I
went out for a walk. My head was still aching and giddy after yesterday.
But as evening came on and the twilight grew denser, my impressions and,
following them, my thoughts, grew more and more different and confused.
Something was not dead within me, in the depths of my heart and
conscience it would not die, and it showed itself in acute depression.
For the most part I jostled my way through the most crowded business
streets, along Myeshtchansky Street, along Sadovy Street and in Yusupov
Garden. I always liked particularly sauntering along these streets in
the dusk, just when there were crowds of working people of all sorts
going home from their daily work, with faces looking cross with anxiety.
What I liked was just that cheap bustle, that bare prose. On this
occasion the jostling of the streets irritated me more than ever. I
could not make out what was wrong with me, I could not find the clue,
something seemed rising up continually in my soul, painfully, and
refusing to be appeased. I returned home completely upset, it was just
as though some crime were lying on my conscience.

The thought that Liza was coming worried me continually. It seemed queer
to me that of all my recollections of yesterday this tormented me, as it
were, especially, as it were, quite separately. Everything else I had
quite succeeded in forgetting by the evening; I dismissed it all and was
still perfectly satisfied with my letter to Simonov. But on this point I
was not satisfied at all. It was as though I were worried only by Liza.
"What if she comes," I thought incessantly, "well, it doesn't matter,
let her come! H'm! it's horrid that she should see, for instance, how I
live. Yesterday I seemed such a hero to her, while now, h'm! It's
horrid, though, that I have let myself go so, the room looks like a
beggar's. And I brought myself to go out to dinner in such a suit! And
my American leather sofa with the stuffing sticking out. And my
dressing-gown, which will not cover me, such tatters, and she will see
all this and she will see Apollon. That beast is certain to insult her.
He will fasten upon her in order to be rude to me. And I, of course,
shall be panic-stricken as usual, I shall begin bowing and scraping
before her and pulling my dressing-gown round me, I shall begin smiling,
telling lies. Oh, the beastliness! And it isn't the beastliness of it
that matters most! There is something more important, more loathsome,
viler! Yes, viler! And to put on that dishonest lying mask again!"...

When I reached that thought I fired up all at once.

"Why dishonest? How dishonest? I was speaking sincerely last night. I
remember there was real feeling in me, too. What I wanted was to excite
an honourable feeling in her.... Her crying was a good thing, it will
have a good effect."

Yet I could not feel at ease. All that evening, even when I had come
back home, even after nine o'clock, when I calculated that Liza could
not possibly come, she still haunted me, and what was worse, she came
back to my mind always in the same position. One moment out of all that
had happened last night stood vividly before my imagination; the moment
when I struck a match and saw her pale, distorted face, with its look of
torture. And what a pitiful, what an unnatural, what a distorted smile
she had at that moment! But I did not know then, that fifteen years
later I should still in my imagination see Liza, always with the
pitiful, distorted, inappropriate smile which was on her face at that
minute.

Next day I was ready again to look upon it all as nonsense, due to
over-excited nerves, and, above all, as _exaggerated_. I was always
conscious of that weak point of mine, and sometimes very much afraid of
it. "I exaggerate everything, that is where I go wrong," I repeated to
myself every hour. But, however, "Liza will very likely come all the
same," was the refrain with which all my reflections ended. I was so
uneasy that I sometimes flew into a fury: "She'll come, she is certain
to come!" I cried, running about the room, "if not to-day, she will come
to-morrow; she'll find me out! The damnable romanticism of these pure
hearts! Oh, the vileness--oh, the silliness--oh, the stupidity of these
'wretched sentimental souls!' Why, how fail to understand? How could one
fail to understand?..."

But at this point I stopped short, and in great confusion, indeed.

And how few, how few words, I thought, in passing, were needed; how
little of the idyllic (and affectedly, bookishly, artificially idyllic
too) had sufficed to turn a whole human life at once according to my
will. That's virginity, to be sure! Freshness of soil!

At times a thought occurred to me, to go to her, "to tell her all," and
beg her not to come to me. But this thought stirred such wrath in me
that I believed I should have crushed that "damned" Liza if she had
chanced to be near me at the time. I should have insulted her, have spat
at her, have turned her out, have struck her!

One day passed, however, another and another; she did not come and I
began to grow calmer. I felt particularly bold and cheerful after nine
o'clock, I even sometimes began dreaming, and rather sweetly: I, for
instance, became the salvation of Liza, simply through her coming to me
and my talking to her.... I develop her, educate her. Finally, I notice
that she loves me, loves me passionately. I pretend not to understand (I
don't know, however, why I pretend, just for effect, perhaps). At last
all confusion, transfigured, trembling and sobbing, she flings herself
at my feet and says that I am her saviour, and that she loves me better
than anything in the world. I am amazed, but.... "Liza," I say, "can you
imagine that I have not noticed your love, I saw it all, I divined it,
but I did not dare to approach you first, because I had an influence
over you and was afraid that you would force yourself, from gratitude,
to respond to my love, would try to rouse in your heart a feeling which
was perhaps absent, and I did not wish that ... because it would be
tyranny ... it would be indelicate (in short, I launch off at that point
into European, inexplicably lofty subtleties à la George Sand), but now,
now you are mine, you are my creation, you are pure, you are good, you
are my noble wife.

     'Into my house come bold and free,
      Its rightful mistress there to be.'"

Then we begin living together, go abroad and so on, and so on. In fact,
in the end it seemed vulgar to me myself, and I began putting out my
tongue at myself.

Besides, they won't let her out, "the hussy!" I thought. They don't let
them go out very readily, especially in the evening (for some reason I
fancied she would come in the evening, and at seven o'clock precisely).
Though she did say she was not altogether a slave there yet, and had
certain rights; so, h'm! Damn it all, she will come, she is sure to
come!

It was a good thing, in fact, that Apollon distracted my attention at
that time by his rudeness. He drove me beyond all patience! He was the
bane of my life, the curse laid upon me by Providence. We had been
squabbling continually for years, and I hated him. My God, how I hated
him! I believe I had never hated any one in my life as I hated him,
especially at some moments. He was an elderly, dignified man, who worked
part of his time as a tailor. But for some unknown reason he despised me
beyond all measure, and looked down upon me insufferably. Though,
indeed, he looked down upon every one. Simply to glance at that flaxen,
smoothly brushed head, at the tuft of hair he combed up on his forehead
and oiled with sunflower oil, at that dignified mouth, compressed into
the shape of the letter V, made one feel one was confronting a man who
never doubted of himself. He was a pedant, to the most extreme point,
the greatest pedant I had met on earth, and with that had a vanity only
befitting Alexander of Macedon. He was in love with every button on his
coat, every nail on his fingers--absolutely in love with them, and he
looked it! In his behaviour to me he was a perfect tyrant, he spoke very
little to me, and if he chanced to glance at me he gave me a firm,
majestically self-confident and invariably ironical look that drove me
sometimes to fury. He did his work with the air of doing me the greatest
favour. Though he did scarcely anything for me, and did not, indeed,
consider himself bound to do anything. There could be no doubt that he
looked upon me as the greatest fool on earth, and that "he did not get
rid of me" was simply that he could get wages from me every month. He
consented to do nothing for me for seven roubles a month. Many sins
should be forgiven me for what I suffered from him. My hatred reached
such a point that sometimes his very step almost threw me into
convulsions. What I loathed particularly was his lisp. His tongue must
have been a little too long or something of that sort, for he
continually lisped, and seemed to be very proud of it, imagining that it
greatly added to his dignity. He spoke in a slow, measured tone, with
his hands behind his back and his eyes fixed on the ground. He maddened
me particularly when he read aloud the psalms to himself behind his
partition. Many a battle I waged over that reading! But he was awfully
fond of reading aloud in the evenings, in a slow, even, sing-song voice,
as though over the dead. It is interesting that that is how he has
ended: he hires himself out to read the psalms over the dead, and at the
same time he kills rats and makes blacking. But at that time I could not
get rid of him, it was as though he were chemically combined with my
existence. Besides, nothing would have induced him to consent to leave
me. I could not live in furnished lodgings: my lodging was my private
solitude, my shell, my cave, in which I concealed myself from all
mankind, and Apollon seemed to me, for some reason, an integral part of
that flat, and for seven years I could not turn him away.

To be two or three days behind with his wages, for instance, was
impossible. He would have made such a fuss, I should not have known
where to hide my head. But I was so exasperated with every one during
those days, that I made up my mind for some reason and with some object
to _punish_ Apollon and not to pay him for a fortnight the wages that
were owing him. I had for a long time--for the last two years--been
intending to do this, simply in order to teach him not to give himself
airs with me, and to show him that if I liked I could withhold his
wages. I purposed to say nothing to him about it, and was purposely
silent indeed, in order to score off his pride and force him to be the
first to speak of his wages. Then I would take the seven roubles out of
a drawer, show him I have the money put aside on purpose, but that I
won't, I won't, I simply won't pay him his wages, I won't just because
that is "what I wish," because "I am master, and it is for me to
decide," because he has been disrespectful, because he has been rude;
but if he were to ask respectfully I might be softened and give it to
him, otherwise he might wait another fortnight, another three weeks, a
whole month....

But angry as I was, yet he got the better of me. I could not hold out
for four days. He began as he always did begin in such cases, for there
had been such cases already, there had been attempts (and it may be
observed I knew all this beforehand, I knew his nasty tactics by heart).
He would begin by fixing upon me an exceedingly severe stare, keeping it
up for several minutes at a time, particularly on meeting me or seeing
me out of the house. If I held out and pretended not to notice these
stares, he would, still in silence, proceed to further tortures. All at
once, _à propos_ of nothing, he would walk softly and smoothly into my
room, when I was pacing up and down or reading, stand at the door, one
hand behind his back and one foot behind the other, and fix upon me a
stare more than severe, utterly contemptuous. If I suddenly asked him
what he wanted, he would make me no answer, but continue staring at me
persistently for some seconds, then, with a peculiar compression of his
lips and a most significant air, deliberately turn round and
deliberately go back to his room. Two hours later he would come out
again and again present himself before me in the same way. It had
happened that in my fury I did not even ask him what he wanted, but
simply raised my head sharply and imperiously and began staring back at
him. So we stared at one another for two minutes; at last he turned with
deliberation and dignity and went back again for two hours.

If I were still not brought to reason by all this, but persisted in my
revolt, he would suddenly begin sighing while he looked at me, long,
deep sighs as though measuring by them the depths of my moral
degradation, and, of course, it ended at last by his triumphing
completely: I raged and shouted, but still was forced to do what he
wanted.

This time the usual staring manoeuvres had scarcely begun when I lost
my temper and flew at him in a fury. I was irritated beyond endurance
apart from him.

"Stay," I cried, in a frenzy, as he was slowly and silently turning,
with one hand behind his back, to go to his room, "stay! Come back, come
back, I tell you!" and I must have bawled so unnaturally, that he turned
round and even looked at me with some wonder. However, he persisted in
saying nothing, and that infuriated me.

"How dare you come and look at me like that without being sent for?
Answer!"

After looking at me calmly for half a minute, he began turning round
again.

"Stay!" I roared, running up to him, "don't stir! There. Answer, now:
what did you come in to look at?"

"If you have any order to give me it's my duty to carry it out," he
answered, after another silent pause, with a slow, measured lisp,
raising his eyebrows and calmly twisting his head from one side to
another, all this with exasperating composure.

"That's not what I am asking you about, you torturer!" I shouted,
turning crimson with anger. "I'll tell you why you came here myself: you
see, I don't give you your wages, you are so proud you don't want to bow
down and ask for it, and so you come to punish me with your stupid
stares, to worry me and you have no sus...pic...ion how stupid it
is--stupid, stupid, stupid, stupid!"...

He would have turned round again without a word, but I seized him.

"Listen," I shouted to him. "Here's the money, do you see, here it is"
(I took it out of the table drawer); "here's the seven roubles complete,
but you are not going to have it, you ... are ... not ... going ... to
... have it until you come respectfully with bowed head to beg my
pardon. Do you hear?"

"That cannot be," he answered, with the most unnatural self-confidence.

"It shall be so," I said, "I give you my word of honour, it shall be!"

"And there's nothing for me to beg your pardon for," he went on, as
though he had not noticed my exclamations at all. "Why, besides, you
called me a 'torturer,' for which I can summon you at the police-station
at any time for insulting behaviour."

"Go, summon me," I roared, "go at once, this very minute, this very
second! You are a torturer all the same! a torturer!"

But he merely looked at me, then turned, and regardless of my loud calls
to him, he walked to his room with an even step and without looking
round.

"If it had not been for Liza nothing of this would have happened," I
decided inwardly. Then, after waiting a minute, I went myself behind his
screen with a dignified and solemn air, though my heart was beating
slowly and violently.

"Apollon," I said quietly and emphatically, though I was breathless, "go
at once without a minute's delay and fetch the police-officer."

He had meanwhile settled himself at his table, put on his spectacles and
taken up some sewing. But, hearing my order, he burst into a guffaw.

"At once, go this minute! Go on, or else you can't imagine what will
happen."

"You are certainly out of your mind," he observed, without even raising
his head, lisping as deliberately as ever and threading his needle.
"Whoever heard of a man sending for the police against himself? And as
for being frightened--you are upsetting yourself about nothing, for
nothing will come of it."

"Go!" I shrieked, clutching him by the shoulder. I felt I should strike
him in a minute.

But I did not notice the door from the passage softly and slowly open at
that instant and a figure come in, stop short, and begin staring at us
in perplexity. I glanced, nearly swooned with shame, and rushed back to
my room. There, clutching at my hair with both hands, I leaned my head
against the wall and stood motionless in that position.

Two minutes later I heard Apollon's deliberate footsteps. "There is some
woman asking for you," he said, looking at me with peculiar severity.
Then he stood aside and let in Liza. He would not go away, but stared at
us sarcastically.

"Go away, go away," I commanded in desperation. At that moment my clock
began whirring and wheezing and struck seven.


IX

     "Into my house come bold and free,
      Its rightful mistress there to be."

I stood before her crushed, crestfallen, revoltingly confused, and I
believe I smiled as I did my utmost to wrap myself in the skirts of my
ragged wadded dressing-gown--exactly as I had imagined the scene not
long before in a fit of depression. After standing over us for a couple
of minutes Apollon went away, but that did not make me more at ease.
What made it worse was that she, too, was overwhelmed with confusion,
more so, in fact, than I should have expected. At the sight of me, of
course.

"Sit down," I said mechanically, moving a chair up to the table, and I
sat down on the sofa. She obediently sat down at once and gazed at me
open-eyed, evidently expecting something from me at once. This naïveté
of expectation drove me to fury, but I restrained myself.

She ought to have tried not to notice, as though everything had been as
usual, while instead of that, she ... and I dimly felt that I should
make her pay dearly for _all this_.

"You have found me in a strange position, Liza," I began, stammering and
knowing that this was the wrong way to begin. "No, no, don't imagine
anything," I cried, seeing that she had suddenly flushed. "I am not
ashamed of my poverty.... On the contrary I look with pride on my
poverty. I am poor but honourable.... One can be poor and honourable," I
muttered. "However ... would you like tea?"...

"No," she was beginning.

"Wait a minute."

I leapt up and ran to Apollon. I had to get out of the room somehow.

"Apollon," I whispered in feverish haste, flinging down before him the
seven roubles which had remained all the time in my clenched fist, "here
are your wages, you see I give them to you; but for that you must come
to my rescue: bring me tea and a dozen rusks from the restaurant. If you
won't go, you'll make me a miserable man! You don't know what this woman
is.... This is--everything! You may be imagining something.... But you
don't know what that woman is!"...

Apollon, who had already sat down to his work and put on his spectacles
again, at first glanced askance at the money without speaking or putting
down his needle; then, without paying the slightest attention to me or
making any answer he went on busying himself with his needle, which he
had not yet threaded. I waited before him for three minutes with my arms
crossed _à la Napoléon_. My temples were moist with sweat. I was pale, I
felt it. But, thank God, he must have been moved to pity, looking at me.
Having threaded his needle he deliberately got up from his seat,
deliberately moved back his chair, deliberately took off his spectacles,
deliberately counted the money, and finally asking me over his shoulder:
"Shall I get a whole portion?" deliberately walked out of the room. As I
was going back to Liza, the thought occurred to me on the way: shouldn't
I run away just as I was in my dressing-gown, no matter where, and then
let happen what would.

I sat down again. She looked at me uneasily. For some minutes we were
silent.

"I will kill him," I shouted suddenly, striking the table with my fist
so that the ink spurted out of the inkstand.

"What are you saying!" she cried, starting.

"I will kill him! kill him!" I shrieked, suddenly striking the table in
absolute frenzy, and at the same time fully understanding how stupid it
was to be in such a frenzy. "You don't know, Liza, what that torturer is
to me. He is my torturer.... He has gone now to fetch some rusks;
he...."

And suddenly I burst into tears. It was an hysterical attack. How
ashamed I felt in the midst of my sobs; but still I could not restrain
them.

She was frightened.

"What is the matter? What is wrong?" she cried, fussing about me.

"Water, give me water, over there!" I muttered in a faint voice, though
I was inwardly conscious that I could have got on very well without
water and without muttering in a faint voice. But I was, what is called,
_putting it on_, to save appearances, though the attack was a genuine
one.

She gave me water, looking at me in bewilderment. At that moment Apollon
brought in the tea. It suddenly seemed to me that this commonplace,
prosaic tea was horribly undignified and paltry after all that had
happened, and I blushed crimson. Liza looked at Apollon with positive
alarm. He went out without a glance at either of us.

"Liza, do you despise me?" I asked, looking at her fixedly, trembling
with impatience to know what she was thinking.

She was confused, and did not know what to answer.

"Drink your tea," I said to her angrily. I was angry with myself, but,
of course, it was she who would have to pay for it. A horrible spite
against her suddenly surged up in my heart; I believe I could have
killed her. To revenge myself on her I swore inwardly not to say a word
to her all the time. "She is the cause of it all," I thought.

Our silence lasted for five minutes. The tea stood on the table; we did
not touch it. I had got to the point of purposely refraining from
beginning in order to embarrass her further; it was awkward for her to
begin alone. Several times she glanced at me with mournful perplexity. I
was obstinately silent. I was, of course, myself the chief sufferer,
because I was fully conscious of the disgusting meanness of my spiteful
stupidity, and yet at the same time I could not restrain myself.

"I want to ... get away ... from there altogether," she began, to break
the silence in some way, but, poor girl, that was just what she ought
not to have spoken about at such a stupid moment to a man so stupid as I
was. My heart positively ached with pity for her tactless and
unnecessary straightforwardness. But something hideous at once stifled
all compassion in me; it even provoked me to greater venom. I did not
care what happened. Another five minutes passed.

"Perhaps I am in your way," she began timidly, hardly audibly, and was
getting up.

But as soon as I saw this first impulse of wounded dignity I positively
trembled with spite, and at once burst out.

"Why have you come to me, tell me that, please?" I began, gasping for
breath and regardless of logical connection in my words. I longed to
have it all out at once, at one burst; I did not even trouble how to
begin. "Why have you come? Answer, answer," I cried, hardly knowing what
I was doing. "I'll tell you, my good girl, why you have come. You've
come because I talked sentimental stuff to you then. So now you are soft
as butter and longing for fine sentiments again. So you may as well know
that I was laughing at you then. And I am laughing at you now. Why are
you shuddering? Yes, I was laughing at you! I had been insulted just
before, at dinner, by the fellows who came that evening before me. I
came to you, meaning to thrash one of them, an officer; but I didn't
succeed, I didn't find him; I had to avenge the insult on some one to
get back my own again; you turned up, I vented my spleen on you and
laughed at you. I had been humiliated, so I wanted to humiliate; I had
been treated like a rag, so I wanted to show my power.... That's what it
was, and you imagined I had come there on purpose to save you. Yes? You
imagined that? You imagined that?"

I knew that she would perhaps be muddled and not take it all in exactly,
but I knew, too, that she would grasp the gist of it, very well indeed.
And so, indeed, she did. She turned white as a handkerchief, tried to
say something, and her lips worked painfully; but she sank on a chair as
though she had been felled by an axe. And all the time afterwards she
listened to me with her lips parted and her eyes wide open, shuddering
with awful terror. The cynicism, the cynicism of my words overwhelmed
her....

"Save you!" I went on, jumping up from my chair and running up and down
the room before her. "Save you from what? But perhaps I am worse than
you myself. Why didn't you throw it in my teeth when I was giving you
that sermon: 'But what did you come here yourself for? was it to read us
a sermon?' Power, power was what I wanted then, sport was what I wanted,
I wanted to wring out your tears, your humiliation, your hysteria--that
was what I wanted then! Of course, I couldn't keep it up then, because I
am a wretched creature, I was frightened, and, the devil knows why, gave
you my address in my folly. Afterwards, before I got home, I was cursing
and swearing at you because of that address, I hated you already because
of the lies I had told you. Because I only like playing with words, only
dreaming, but, do you know, what I really want is that you should all go
to hell. That is what I want. I want peace; yes, I'd sell the whole
world for a farthing, straight off, so long as I was left in peace. Is
the world to go to pot, or am I to go without my tea? I say that the
world may go to pot for me so long as I always get my tea. Did you know
that, or not? Well, anyway, I know that I am a blackguard, a scoundrel,
an egoist, a sluggard. Here I have been shuddering for the last three
days at the thought of your coming. And do you know what has worried me
particularly for these three days? That I posed as such a hero to you,
and now you would see me in a wretched torn dressing-gown, beggarly,
loathsome. I told you just now that I was not ashamed of my poverty; so
you may as well know that I am ashamed of it; I am more ashamed of it
than of anything, more afraid of it than of being found out if I were a
thief, because I am as vain as though I had been skinned and the very
air blowing on me hurt. Surely by now you must realize that I shall
never forgive you for having found me in this wretched dressing-gown,
just as I was flying at Apollon like a spiteful cur. The saviour, the
former hero, was flying like a mangy, unkempt sheep-dog at his lackey,
and the lackey was jeering at him! And I shall never forgive you for the
tears I could not help shedding before you just now, like some silly
woman put to shame! And for what I am confessing to you now, I shall
never forgive _you_ either! Yes--you must answer for it all because you
turned up like this, because I am a blackguard, because I am the
nastiest, stupidest, absurdest and most envious of all the worms on
earth, who are not a bit better than I am, but, the devil knows why, are
never put to confusion; while I shall always be insulted by every louse,
that is my doom! And what is it to me that you don't understand a word
of this! And what do I care, what do I care about you, and whether you
go to ruin there or not? Do you understand? How I shall hate you now
after saying this, for having been here and listening. Why, it's not
once in a lifetime a man speaks out like this, and then it is in
hysterics!... What more do you want? Why do you still stand confronting
me, after all this? Why are you worrying me? Why don't you go?"

But at this point a strange thing happened. I was so accustomed to think
and imagine everything from books, and to picture everything in the
world to myself just as I had made it up in my dreams beforehand, that I
could not all at once take in this strange circumstance. What happened
was this: Liza, insulted and crushed by me, understood a great deal more
than I imagined. She understood from all this what a woman understands
first of all, if she feels genuine love, that is, that I was myself
unhappy.

The frightened and wounded expression on her face was followed first by
a look of sorrowful perplexity. When I began calling myself a scoundrel
and a blackguard and my tears flowed (the tirade was accompanied
throughout by tears) her whole face worked convulsively. She was on the
point of getting up and stopping me; when I finished she took no notice
of my shouting: "Why are you here, why don't you go away?" but realized
only that it must have been very bitter to me to say all this. Besides,
she was so crushed, poor girl; she considered herself infinitely beneath
me; how could she feel anger or resentment? She suddenly leapt up from
her chair with an irresistible impulse and held out her hands, yearning
towards me, though still timid and not daring to stir.... At this point
there was a revulsion in my heart, too. Then she suddenly rushed to me,
threw her arms round me and burst into tears. I, too, could not restrain
myself, and sobbed as I never had before.

"They won't let me.... I can't be good!" I managed to articulate; then I
went to the sofa, fell on it face downwards, and sobbed on it for a
quarter of an hour in genuine hysterics. She came close to me, put her
arms round me and stayed motionless in that position. But the trouble
was that the hysterics could not go on for ever, and (I am writing the
loathsome truth) lying face downwards on the sofa with my face thrust
into my nasty leather pillow, I began by degrees to be aware of a
far-away, involuntary but irresistible feeling that it would be awkward
now for me to raise my head and look Liza straight in the face. Why was
I ashamed? I don't know, but I was ashamed. The thought, too, came into
my overwrought brain that our parts now were completely changed, that
she was now the heroine, while I was just such a crushed and humiliated
creature as she had been before me that night--four days before.... And
all this came into my mind during the minutes I was lying on my face on
the sofa.

My God! surely I was not envious of her then.

I don't know, to this day I cannot decide, and at the time, of course, I
was still less able to understand what I was feeling than now. I cannot
get on without domineering and tyrannizing over some one, but ... there
is no explaining anything by reasoning and so it is useless to reason.

I conquered myself, however, and raised my head; I had to do so sooner
or later ... and I am convinced to this day that it was just because I
was ashamed to look at her that another feeling was suddenly kindled and
flamed up in my heart ... a feeling of mastery and possession. My eyes
gleamed with passion, and I gripped her hands tightly. How I hated her
and how I was drawn to her at that minute! The one feeling intensified
the other. It was almost like an act of vengeance. At first there was a
look of amazement, even of terror on her face, but only for one instant.
She warmly and rapturously embraced me.


X

A quarter of an hour later I was rushing up and down the room in
frenzied impatience, from minute to minute I went up to the screen and
peeped through the crack at Liza. She was sitting on the ground with her
head leaning against the bed, and must have been crying. But she did not
go away, and that irritated me. This time she understood it all. I had
insulted her finally, but ... there's no need to describe it. She
realized that my outburst of passion had been simply revenge, a fresh
humiliation, and that to my earlier, almost causeless hatred was added
now a _personal hatred_, born of envy.... Though I do not maintain
positively that she understood all this distinctly; but she certainly
did fully understand that I was a despicable man, and what was worse,
incapable of loving her.

I know I shall be told that this is incredible--but it is incredible to
be as spiteful and stupid as I was; it may be added that it was strange
I should not love her, or at any rate, appreciate her love. Why is it
strange? In the first place, by then I was incapable of love, for I
repeat, with me loving meant tyrannizing and showing my moral
superiority. I have never in my life been able to imagine any other sort
of love, and have nowadays come to the point of sometimes thinking that
love really consists in the right--freely given by the beloved
object--to tyrannize over her.

Even in my underground dreams I did not imagine love except as a
struggle. I began it always with hatred and ended it with moral
subjugation, and afterwards I never knew what to do with the subjugated
object. And what is there to wonder at in that, since I had succeeded in
so corrupting myself, since I was so out of touch with "real life," as
to have actually thought of reproaching her, and putting her to shame
for having come to me to hear "fine sentiments"; and did not even guess
that she had come not to hear fine sentiments, but to love me, because
to a woman all reformation, all salvation from any sort of ruin, and all
moral renewal is included in love and can only show itself in that form.

I did not hate her so much, however, when I was running about the room
and peeping through the crack in the screen. I was only insufferably
oppressed by her being here. I wanted her to disappear. I wanted
"peace," to be left alone in my underground world. Real life oppressed
me with its novelty so much that I could hardly breathe.

But several minutes passed and she still remained, without stirring, as
though she were unconscious. I had the shamelessness to tap softly at
the screen as though to remind her.... She started, sprang up, and flew
to seek her kerchief, her hat, her coat, as though making her escape
from me.... Two minutes later she came from behind the screen and looked
with heavy eyes at me. I gave a spiteful grin, which was forced,
however, to _keep up appearances_, and I turned away from her eyes.

"Good-bye," she said, going towards the door.

I ran up to her, seized her hand, opened it, thrust something in it and
closed it again. Then I turned at once and dashed away in haste to the
other corner of the room to avoid seeing, anyway....

I did mean a moment since to tell a lie--to write that I did this
accidentally, not knowing what I was doing through foolishness, through
losing my head. But I don't want to lie, and so I will say straight out
that I opened her hand and put the money in it ... from spite. It came
into my head to do this while I was running up and down the room and she
was sitting behind the screen. But this I can say for certain: though I
did that cruel thing purposely, it was not an impulse from the heart,
but came from my evil brain. This cruelty was so affected, so purposely
made up, so completely a product of the brain, of books, that I could
not even keep it up a minute--first I dashed away to avoid seeing her,
and then in shame and despair rushed after Liza. I opened the door in
the passage and began listening.

"Liza! Liza!" I cried on the stairs, but in a low voice, not boldly.

There was no answer, but I fancied I heard her footsteps, lower down on
the stairs.

"Liza!" I cried, more loudly.

No answer. But at that minute I heard the stiff outer glass door open
heavily with a creak and slam violently, the sound echoed up the stairs.

She had gone. I went back to my room in hesitation. I felt horribly
oppressed.

I stood still at the table, beside the chair on which she had sat and
looked aimlessly before me. A minute passed, suddenly I started;
straight before me on the table I saw.... In short, I saw a crumpled
blue five-rouble note, the one I had thrust into her hand a minute
before. It was the same note; it could be no other, there was no other
in the flat. So she had managed to fling it from her hand on the table
at the moment when I had dashed into the further corner.

Well! I might have expected that she would do that. Might I have
expected it? No, I was such an egoist, I was so lacking in respect for
my fellow-creatures that I could not even imagine she would do so. I
could not endure it. A minute later I flew like a madman to dress,
flinging on what I could at random and ran headlong after her. She could
not have got two hundred paces away when I ran out into the street.

It was a still night and the snow was coming down in masses and falling
almost perpendicularly, covering the pavement and the empty street as
though with a pillow. There was no one in the street, no sound was to be
heard. The street lamps gave a disconsolate and useless glimmer. I ran
two hundred paces to the cross-roads and stopped short.

Where had she gone? And why was I running after her?

Why? To fall down before her, to sob with remorse, to kiss her feet, to
entreat her forgiveness! I longed for that, my whole breast was being
rent to pieces, and never, never shall I recall that minute with
indifference. But--what for? I thought. Should I not begin to hate her,
perhaps, even to-morrow, just because I had kissed her feet to-day?
Should I give her happiness? Had I not recognized that day, for the
hundredth time, what I was worth? Should I not torture her?

I stood in the snow, gazing into the troubled darkness and pondered
this.

"And will it not be better?" I mused fantastically, afterwards at home,
stifling the living pang of my heart with fantastic dreams. "Will it not
be better that she should keep the resentment of the insult for ever?
Resentment--why, it is purification; it is a most stinging and painful
consciousness! To-morrow I should have defiled her soul and have
exhausted her heart, while now the feeling of insult will never die in
her heart, and however loathsome the filth awaiting her--the feeling of
insult will elevate and purify her ... by hatred ... h'm! ... perhaps,
too, by forgiveness.... Will all that make things easier for her
though?..."

And, indeed, I will ask on my own account here, an idle question: which
is better--cheap happiness or exalted sufferings? Well, which is better?

So I dreamed as I sat at home that evening, almost dead with the pain in
my soul. Never had I endured such suffering and remorse, yet could there
have been the faintest doubt when I ran out from my lodging that I
should turn back half-way? I never met Liza again and I have heard
nothing of her. I will add, too, that I remained for a long time
afterwards pleased with the phrase about the benefit from resentment and
hatred in spite of the fact that I almost fell ill from misery.

       *     *     *     *     *

Even now, so many years later, all this is somehow a very evil memory. I
have many evil memories now, but ... hadn't I better end my "Notes"
here? I believe I made a mistake in beginning to write them, anyway I
have felt ashamed all the time I've been writing this story; so it's
hardly literature so much as a corrective punishment. Why, to tell long
stories, showing how I have spoiled my life through morally rotting in
my corner, through lack of fitting environment, through divorce from
real life, and rankling spite in my underground world, would certainly
not be interesting; a novel needs a hero, and all the traits for an
anti-hero are _expressly_ gathered together here, and what matters most,
it all produces an unpleasant impression, for we are all divorced from
life, we are all cripples, every one of us, more or less. We are so
divorced from it that we feel at once a sort of loathing for real life,
and so cannot bear to be reminded of it. Why, we have come almost to
looking upon real life as an effort, almost as hard work, and we are all
privately agreed that it is better in books. And why do we fuss and fume
sometimes? Why are we perverse and ask for something else? We don't know
what ourselves. It would be the worse for us if our petulant prayers
were answered. Come, try, give any one of us, for instance, a little
more independence, untie our hands, widen the spheres of our activity,
relax the control and we ... yes, I assure you ... we should be begging
to be under control again at once. I know that you will very likely be
angry with me for that, and will begin shouting and stamping. Speak for
yourself, you will say, and for your miseries in your underground holes,
and don't dare to say all of us--excuse me, gentlemen, I am not
justifying myself with that "all of us." As for what concerns me in
particular I have only in my life carried to an extreme what you have
not dared to carry half-way, and what's more, you have taken your
cowardice for good sense, and have found comfort in deceiving
yourselves. So that perhaps, after all, there is more life in me than in
you. Look into it more carefully! Why, we don't even know what living
means now, what it is, and what it is called? Leave us alone without
books and we shall be lost and in confusion at once. We shall not know
what to join on to, what to cling to, what to love and what to hate,
what to respect and what to despise. We are oppressed at being men--men
with a real individual body and blood, we are ashamed of it, we think it
a disgrace and try to contrive to be some sort of impossible generalized
man. We are stillborn, and for generations past have been begotten, not
by living fathers, and that suits us better and better. We are
developing a taste for it. Soon we shall contrive to be born somehow
from an idea. But enough; I don't want to write more from "Underground."

    [_The notes of this paradoxalist do not end here, however.
    He could not refrain from going on with them, but it seems
    to us that we may stop here._]




A FAINT HEART

A STORY


Under the same roof in the same flat on the same fourth storey lived two
young men, colleagues in the service, Arkady Ivanovitch Nefedevitch and
Vasya Shumkov.... The author of course, feels the necessity of
explaining to the reader why one is given his full title, while the
other's name is abbreviated, if only that such a mode of expression may
not be regarded as unseemly and rather familiar. But, to do so, it would
first be necessary to explain and describe the rank and years and
calling and duty in the service, and even, indeed, the characters of the
persons concerned; and since there are so many writers who begin in that
way, the author of the proposed story, solely in order to be unlike them
(that is, some people will perhaps say, entirely on account of his
boundless vanity), decides to begin straightaway with action. Having
completed this introduction, he begins.

Towards six o'clock on New Year's Eve Shumkov returned home. Arkady
Ivanovitch, who was lying on the bed, woke up and looked at his friend
with half-closed eyes. He saw that Vasya had on his very best trousers
and a very clean shirt front. That, of course, struck him. "Where had
Vasya to go like that? And he had not dined at home either!" Meanwhile,
Shumkov had lighted a candle, and Arkady Ivanovitch guessed immediately
that his friend was intending to wake him accidentally. Vasya did, in
fact, clear his throat twice, walked twice up and down the room, and at
last, quite accidentally, let the pipe, which he had begun filling in
the corner by the stove, slip out of his hands. Arkady Ivanovitch
laughed to himself.

"Vasya, give over pretending!" he said.

"Arkasha, you are not asleep?"

"I really cannot say for certain; it seems to me I am not."

"Oh, Arkasha! How are you, dear boy? Well, brother! Well, brother!...
You don't know what I have to tell you!"

"I certainly don't know; come here."

As though expecting this, Vasya went up to him at once, not at all
anticipating, however, treachery from Arkady Ivanovitch. The other
seized him very adroitly by the arms, turned him over, held him down,
and began, as it is called, "strangling" his victim, and apparently this
proceeding afforded the lighthearted Arkady Ivanovitch great
satisfaction.

"Caught!" he cried. "Caught!"

"Arkasha, Arkasha, what are you about? Let me go. For goodness sake, let
me go, I shall crumple my dress coat!"

"As though that mattered! What do you want with a dress coat? Why were
you so confiding as to put yourself in my hands? Tell me, where have you
been? Where have you dined?"

"Arkasha, for goodness sake, let me go!"

"Where have you dined?"

"Why, it's about that I want to tell you."

"Tell away, then."

"But first let me go."

"Not a bit of it, I won't let you go till you tell me!"

"Arkasha! Arkasha! But do you understand, I can't--it is utterly
impossible!" cried Vasya, helplessly wriggling out of his friend's
powerful clutches, "you know there are subjects!"

"How--subjects?"...

"Why, subjects that you can't talk about in such a position without
losing your dignity; it's utterly impossible; it would make it
ridiculous, and this is not a ridiculous matter, it is important."

"Here, he's going in for being important! That's a new idea! You tell me
so as to make me laugh, that's how you must tell me; I don't want
anything important; or else you are no true friend of mine. Do you call
yourself a friend? Eh?"

"Arkasha, I really can't!"

"Well, I don't want to hear...."

"Well, Arkasha!" began Vasya, lying across the bed and doing his utmost
to put all the dignity possible into his words. "Arkasha! If you like, I
will tell you; only...."

"Well, what?..."

"Well, I am engaged to be married!"

Without uttering another word Arkady Ivanovitch took Vasya up in his
arms like a baby, though the latter was by no means short, but rather
long and thin, and began dexterously carrying him up and down the room,
pretending that he was hushing him to sleep.

"I'll put you in your swaddling clothes, Master Bridegroom," he kept
saying. But seeing that Vasya lay in his arms, not stirring or uttering
a word, he thought better of it at once, and reflecting that the joke
had gone too far, set him down in the middle of the room and kissed him
on the cheek in the most genuine and friendly way.

"Vasya, you are not angry?"

"Arkasha, listen...."

"Come, it's New Year's Eve."

"Oh, I'm all right; but why are you such a madman, such a scatterbrain?
How many times I have told you: Arkasha, it's really not funny, not
funny at all!"

"Oh, well, you are not angry?"

"Oh, I'm all right; am I ever angry with any one! But you have wounded
me, do you understand?"

"But how have I wounded you? In what way?"

"I come to you as to a friend, with a full heart, to pour out my soul to
you, to tell you of my happiness...."

"What happiness? Why don't you speak?..."

"Oh, well, I am going to get married!" Vasya answered with vexation, for
he really was a little exasperated.

"You! You are going to get married! So you really mean it?" Arkasha
cried at the top of his voice. "No, no ... but what's this? He talks
like this and his tears are flowing.... Vasya, my little Vasya, don't,
my little son! Is it true, really?" And Arkady Ivanovitch flew to hug
him again.

"Well, do you see, how it is now?" said Vasya. "You are kind, of course,
you are a friend, I know that. I come to you with such joy, such
rapture, and all of a sudden I have to disclose all the joy of my heart,
all my rapture struggling across the bed, in an undignified way.... You
understand, Arkasha," Vasya went on, half laughing. "You see, it made it
seem comic: and in a sense I did not belong to myself at that minute. I
could not let this be slighted.... What's more, if you had asked me her
name, I swear, I would sooner you killed me than have answered you."

"But, Vasya, why did you not speak! You should have told me all about it
sooner and I would not have played the fool!" cried Arkady Ivanovitch in
genuine despair.

"Come, that's enough, that's enough! Of course, that's how it is.... You
know what it all comes from--from my having a good heart. What vexes me
is, that I could not tell you as I wanted to, making you glad and happy,
telling you nicely and initiating you into my secret properly....
Really, Arkasha, I love you so much that I believe if it were not for
you I shouldn't be getting married, and, in fact, I shouldn't be living
in this world at all!"

Arkady Ivanovitch, who was excessively sentimental, cried and laughed at
once as he listened to Vasya. Vasya did the same. Both flew to embrace
one another again and forgot the past.

"How is it--how is it? Tell me all about it, Vasya! I am astonished,
excuse me, brother, but I am utterly astonished; it's a perfect
thunderbolt, by Jove! Nonsense, nonsense, brother, you have made it up,
you've really made it up, you are telling fibs!" cried Arkady
Ivanovitch, and he actually looked into Vasya's face with genuine
uncertainty, but seeing in it the radiant confirmation of a positive
intention of being married as soon as possible, threw himself on the bed
and began rolling from side to side in ecstasy till the walls shook.

"Vasya, sit here," he said at last, sitting down on the bed.

"I really don't know, brother, where to begin!"

They looked at one another in joyful excitement.

"Who is she, Vasya?"

"The Artemyevs!..." Vasya pronounced, in a voice weak with emotion.

"No?"

"Well, I did buzz into your ears about them at first, and then I shut
up, and you noticed nothing. Ah, Arkasha, if you knew how hard it was to
keep it from you; but I was afraid, afraid to speak! I thought it would
all go wrong, and you know I was in love, Arkasha! My God! my God! You
see this was the trouble," he began, pausing continually from agitation,
"she had a suitor a year ago, but he was suddenly ordered somewhere; I
knew him--he was a fellow, bless him! Well, he did not write at all, he
simply vanished. They waited and waited, wondering what it meant....
Four months ago he suddenly came back married, and has never set foot
within their doors! It was coarse--shabby! And they had no one to stand
up for them. She cried and cried, poor girl, and I fell in love with her
... indeed, I had been in love with her long before, all the time! I
began comforting her, and was always going there.... Well, and I really
don't know how it has all come about, only she came to love me; a week
ago I could not restrain myself, I cried, I sobbed, and told her
everything--well, that I love her--everything, in fact!... 'I am ready
to love you, too, Vassily Petrovitch, only I am a poor girl, don't make
a mock of me; I don't dare to love any one.' Well, brother, you
understand! You understand?... On that we got engaged on the spot. I
kept thinking and thinking and thinking and thinking, I said to her,
'How are we to tell your mother?' She said, 'It will be hard, wait a
little; she's afraid, and now maybe she would not let you have me; she
keeps crying, too.' Without telling her I blurted it out to her mother
to-day. Lizanka fell on her knees before her, I did the same ... well,
she gave us her blessing. Arkasha, Arkasha! My dear fellow! We will live
together. No, I won't part from you for anything."

"Vasya, look at you as I may, I can't believe it. I don't believe it, I
swear. I keep feeling as though.... Listen, how can you be engaged to be
married?... How is it I didn't know, eh? Do you know, Vasya, I will
confess it to you now. I was thinking of getting married myself; but now
since you are going to be married, it is just as good! Be happy, be
happy!..."

"Brother, I feel so lighthearted now, there is such sweetness in my soul
..." said Vasya, getting up and pacing about the room excitedly. "Don't
you feel the same? We shall be poor, of course, but we shall be happy;
and you know it is not a wild fancy; our happiness is not a fairy tale;
we shall be happy in reality!..."

"Vasya, Vasya, listen!"

"What?" said Vasya, standing before Arkady Ivanovitch.

"The idea occurs to me; I am really afraid to say it to you.... Forgive
me, and settle my doubts. What are you going to live on? You know I am
delighted that you are going to be married, of course, I am delighted,
and I don't know what to do with myself, but--what are you going to live
on? Eh?"

"Oh, good Heavens! What a fellow you are, Arkasha!" said Vasya, looking
at Nefedevitch in profound astonishment. "What do you mean? Even her old
mother, even she did not think of that for two minutes when I put it all
clearly before her. You had better ask what they are living on! They
have five hundred roubles a year between the three of them: the pension,
which is all they have, since the father died. She and her old mother
and her little brother, whose schooling is paid for out of that income
too--that is how they live! It's you and I are the capitalists! Some
good years it works out to as much as seven hundred for me."

"I say, Vasya, excuse me; I really ... you know I ... I am only thinking
how to prevent things going wrong. How do you mean, seven hundred? It's
only three hundred...."

"Three hundred!... And Yulian Mastakovitch? Have you forgotten him?"

"Yulian Mastakovitch? But you know that's uncertain, brother; that's not
the same thing as three hundred roubles of secure salary, where every
rouble is a friend you can trust. Yulian Mastakovitch, of course, he's a
great man, in fact, I respect him, I understand him, though he is so far
above us; and, by Jove, I love him, because he likes you and gives you
something for your work, though he might not pay you, but simply order a
clerk to work for him--but you will agree, Vasya.... Let me tell you,
too, I am not talking nonsense. I admit in all Petersburg you won't find
a handwriting like your handwriting, I am ready to allow that to you,"
Nefedevitch concluded, not without enthusiasm. "But, God forbid! you may
displease him all at once, you may not satisfy him, your work with him
may stop, he may take another clerk--all sorts of things may happen, in
fact! You know, Yulian Mastakovitch may be here to-day and gone
to-morrow...."

"Well, Arkasha, the ceiling might fall on our heads this minute."

"Oh, of course, of course, I mean nothing."

"But listen, hear what I have got to say--you know, I don't see how he
can part with me.... No, hear what I have to say! hear what I have to
say! You see, I perform all my duties punctually; you know how kind he
is, you know, Arkasha, he gave me fifty roubles in silver to-day!"

"Did he really, Vasya? A bonus for you?"

"Bonus, indeed, it was out of his own pocket. He said: 'Why, you have
had no money for five months, brother, take some if you want it; thank
you, I am satisfied with you.'... Yes, really! 'Yes, you don't work for
me for nothing,' said he. He did, indeed, that's what he said. It
brought tears into my eyes, Arkasha. Good Heavens, yes!"

"I say, Vasya, have you finished copying those papers?..."

"No.... I haven't finished them yet."

"Vas...ya! My angel! What have you been doing?"

"Listen, Arkasha, it doesn't matter, they are not wanted for another two
days, I have time enough...."

"How is it you have not done them?"

"That's all right, that's all right. You look so horror-stricken that
you turn me inside out and make my heart ache! You are always going on
at me like this! He's for ever crying out: Oh, oh, oh!!! Only consider,
what does it matter? Why, I shall finish it, of course I shall finish
it...."

"What if you don't finish it?" cried Arkady, jumping up, "and he has
made you a present to-day! And you going to be married.... Tut, tut,
tut!..."

"It's all right, it's all right," cried Shumkov, "I shall sit down
directly, I shall sit down this minute."

"How did you come to leave it, Vasya?"

"Oh, Arkasha! How could I sit down to work! Have I been in a fit state?
Why, even at the office I could scarcely sit still, I could scarcely
bear the beating of my heart.... Oh! oh! Now I shall work all night, and
I shall work all to-morrow night, and the night after, too--and I shall
finish it."

"Is there a great deal left?"

"Don't hinder me, for goodness' sake, don't hinder me; hold your
tongue."

Arkady Ivanovitch went on tip-toe to the bed and sat down, then suddenly
wanted to get up, but was obliged to sit down again, remembering that he
might interrupt him, though he could not sit still for excitement: it
was evident that the news had thoroughly upset him, and the first thrill
of delight had not yet passed off. He glanced at Shumkov; the latter
glanced at him, smiled, and shook his finger at him, then, frowning
severely (as though all his energy and the success of his work depended
upon it), fixed his eyes on the papers.

It seemed that he, too, could not yet master his emotion; he kept
changing his pen, fidgeting in his chair, re-arranging things, and
setting to work again, but his hand trembled and refused to move.

"Arkasha, I've talked to them about you," he cried suddenly, as though
he had just remembered it.

"Yes," cried Arkasha, "I was just wanting to ask you that. Well?"

"Well, I'll tell you everything afterwards. Of course, it is my own
fault, but it quite went out of my head that I didn't mean to say
anything till I had written four pages, but I thought of you and of
them. I really can't write, brother, I keep thinking about you...."

Vasya smiled.

A silence followed.

"Phew! What a horrid pen," cried Shumkov, flinging it on the table in
vexation. He took another.

"Vasya! listen! one word...."

"Well, make haste, and for the last time."

"Have you a great deal left to do?"

"Ah, brother!" Vasya frowned, as though there could be nothing more
terrible and murderous in the whole world than such a question. "A lot,
a fearful lot."

"Do you know, I have an idea----"

"What?"

"Oh, never mind, never mind; go on writing."

"Why, what? what?"

"It's past six, Vasya."

Here Nefedevitch smiled and winked slyly at Vasya, though with a certain
timidity, not knowing how Vasya would take it.

"Well, what is it?" said Vasya, throwing down his pen, looking him
straight in the face and actually turning pale with excitement.

"Do you know what?"

"For goodness sake, what is it?"

"I tell you what, you are excited, you won't get much done.... Stop,
stop, stop! I have it, I have it--listen," said Nefedevitch, jumping up
from the bed in delight, preventing Vasya from speaking and doing his
utmost to ward off all objections; "first of all you must get calm, you
must pull yourself together, mustn't you?"

"Arkasha, Arkasha!" cried Vasya, jumping up from his chair, "I will work
all night, I will, really."

"Of course, of course, you won't go to bed till morning."

"I won't go to bed, I won't go to bed at all."

"No, that won't do, that won't do: you must sleep, go to bed at five. I
will call you at eight. To-morrow is a holiday; you can sit and scribble
away all day long.... Then the night and--but have you a great deal left
to do?"

"Yes, look, look!"

Vasya, quivering with excitement and suspense, showed the manuscript:
"Look!"

"I say, brother, that's not much."

"My dear fellow, there's some more of it," said Vasya, looking very
timidly at Nefedevitch, as though the decision whether he was to go or
not depended upon the latter.

"How much?"

"Two signatures."

"Well, what's that? Come, I tell you what. We shall have time to finish
it, by Jove, we shall!"

"Arkasha!"

"Vasya, listen! To-night, on New Year's Eve, every one is at home with
his family. You and I are the only ones without a home or relations....
Oh, Vasya!"

Nefedevitch clutched Vasya and hugged him in his leonine arms.

"Arkasha, it's settled."

"Vasya, boy, I only wanted to say this. You see, Vasya--listen,
bandy-legs, listen!..."

Arkady stopped, with his mouth open, because he could not speak for
delight. Vasya held him by the shoulders, gazed into his face and moved
his lips, as though he wanted to speak for him.

"Well," he brought out at last.

"Introduce me to them to-day."

"Arkady, let us go to tea there. I tell you what, I tell you what. We
won't even stay to see in the New Year, we'll come away earlier," cried
Vasya, with genuine inspiration.

"That is, we'll go for two hours, neither more nor less...."

"And then separation till I have finished...."

"Vasya, boy!"

"Arkady!"

Three minutes later Arkady was dressed in his best. Vasya did nothing
but brush himself, because he had been in such haste to work that he had
not changed his trousers.

They hurried out into the street, each more pleased than the other.
Their way lay from the Petersburg Side to Kolomna. Arkady Ivanovitch
stepped out boldly and vigorously, so that from his walk alone one could
see how glad he was at the good fortune of his friend, who was more and
more radiant with happiness. Vasya trotted along with shorter steps,
though his deportment was none the less dignified. Arkady Ivanovitch, in
fact, had never seen him before to such advantage. At that moment he
actually felt more respect for him, and Vasya's physical defect, of
which the reader is not yet aware (Vasya was slightly deformed), which
always called forth a feeling of loving sympathy in Arkady Ivanovitch's
kind heart, contributed to the deep tenderness the latter felt for him
at this moment, a tenderness of which Vasya was in every way worthy.
Arkady Ivanovitch felt ready to weep with happiness, but he restrained
himself.

"Where are you going, where are you going, Vasya? It is nearer this
way," he cried, seeing that Vasya was making in the direction of
Voznesenky.

"Hold your tongue, Arkasha."

"It really is nearer, Vasya."

"Do you know what, Arkasha?" Vasya began mysteriously, in a voice
quivering with joy, "I tell you what, I want to take Lizanka a little
present."

"What sort of present?"

"At the corner here, brother, is Madame Leroux's, a wonderful shop."

"Well."

"A cap, my dear, a cap; I saw such a charming little cap to-day. I
inquired, I was told it was the _façon Manon Lescaut_--a delightful
thing. Cherry-coloured ribbons, and if it is not dear ... Arkasha, even
if it is dear...."

"I think you are superior to any of the poets, Vasya. Come along."

They ran along, and two minutes later went into the shop. They were met
by a black-eyed Frenchwoman with curls, who, from the first glance at
her customers, became as joyous and happy as they, even happier, if one
may say so. Vasya was ready to kiss Madame Leroux in his delight....

"Arkasha," he said in an undertone, casting a casual glance at all the
grand and beautiful things on little wooden stands on the huge table,
"lovely things! What's that? What's this? This one, for instance, this
little sweet, do you see?" Vasya whispered, pointing to a charming cap
further away, which was not the one he meant to buy, because he had
already from afar descried and fixed his eyes upon the real, famous one,
standing at the other end. He looked at it in such a way that one might
have supposed some one was going to steal it, or as though the cap
itself might take wings and fly into the air just to prevent Vasya from
obtaining it.

"Look," said Arkady Ivanovitch, pointing to one, "I think that's
better."

"Well, Arkasha, that does you credit; I begin to respect you for your
taste," said Vasya, resorting to cunning with Arkasha in the tenderness
of his heart, "your cap is charming, but come this way."

"Where is there a better one, brother?"

"Look; this way."

"That," said Arkady, doubtfully.

But when Vasya, incapable of restraining himself any longer, took it
from the stand from which it seemed to fly spontaneously, as though
delighted at falling at last into the hands of so good a customer, and
they heard the rustle of its ribbons, ruches and lace, an unexpected cry
of delight broke from the powerful chest of Arkady Ivanovitch. Even
Madame Leroux, while maintaining her incontestable dignity and
pre-eminence in matters of taste, and remaining mute from condescension,
rewarded Vasya with a smile of complete approbation, everything in her
glance, gesture and smile saying at once: "Yes, you have chosen rightly,
and are worthy of the happiness which awaits you."

"It has been dangling its charms in coy seclusion," cried Vasya,
transferring his tender feelings to the charming cap. "You have been
hiding on purpose, you sly little pet!" And he kissed it, that is the
air surrounding it, for he was afraid to touch his treasure.

"Retiring as true worth and virtue," Arkady added enthusiastically,
quoting humorously from a comic paper he had read that morning. "Well,
Vasya?"

"Hurrah, Arkasha! You are witty to-day. I predict you will make a
sensation, as women say. Madame Leroux, Madame Leroux!"

"What is your pleasure?"

"Dear Madame Leroux."

Madame Leroux looked at Arkady Ivanovitch and smiled condescendingly.

"You wouldn't believe how I adore you at this moment.... Allow me to
give you a kiss...." And Vasya kissed the shopkeeper.

She certainly at that moment needed all her dignity to maintain her
position with such a madcap. But I contend that the innate, spontaneous
courtesy and grace with which Madame Leroux received Vasya's enthusiasm,
was equally befitting. She forgave him, and how tactfully, how
graciously, she knew how to behave in the circumstances. How could she
have been angry with Vasya?

"Madame Leroux, how much?"

"Five roubles in silver," she answered, straightening herself with a new
smile.

"And this one, Madame Leroux?" said Arkady Ivanovitch, pointing to his
choice.

"That one is eight roubles."

"There, you see--there, you see! Come, Madame Leroux, tell me which is
nicer, more graceful, more charming, which of them suits you best?"

"The second is richer, but your choice _c'est plus coquet_."

"Then we will take it."

Madame Leroux took a sheet of very delicate paper, pinned it up, and the
paper with the cap wrapped in it seemed even lighter than the paper
alone. Vasya took it carefully, almost holding his breath, bowed to
Madame Leroux, said something else very polite to her and left the shop.

"I am a lady's man, I was born to be a lady's man," said Vasya, laughing
a little noiseless, nervous laugh and dodging the passers-by, whom he
suspected of designs for crushing his precious cap.

"Listen, Arkady, brother," he began a minute later, and there was a note
of triumph, of infinite affection in his voice. "Arkady, I am so happy,
I am so happy!"

"Vasya! how glad I am, dear boy!"

"No, Arkasha, no. I know that there is no limit to your affection for
me; but you cannot be feeling one-hundredth part of what I am feeling at
this moment. My heart is so full, so full! Arkasha, I am not worthy of
such happiness. I feel that, I am conscious of it. Why has it come to
me?" he said, his voice full of stifled sobs. "What have I done to
deserve it? Tell me. Look what lots of people, what lots of tears, what
sorrow, what work-a-day life without a holiday, while I, I am loved by a
girl like that, I.... But you will see her yourself immediately, you
will appreciate her noble heart. I was born in a humble station, now I
have a grade in the service and an independent income--my salary. I was
born with a physical defect, I am a little deformed. See, she loves me
as I am. Yulian Mastakovitch was so kind, so attentive, so gracious
to-day; he does not often talk to me; he came up to me: 'Well, how goes
it, Vasya' (yes, really, he called me Vasya), 'are you going to have a
good time for the holiday, eh?' he laughed.

"'Well, the fact is, Your Excellency, I have work to do,' but then I
plucked up courage and said: 'and maybe I shall have a good time, too,
Your Excellency.' I really said it. He gave me the money, on the spot,
then he said a couple of words more to me. Tears came into my eyes,
brother, I actually cried, and he, too, seemed touched, he patted me on
the shoulder, and said: 'Feel always, Vasya, as you feel this now.'"

Vasya paused for an instant. Arkady Ivanovitch turned away, and he, too,
wiped away a tear with his fist.

"And, and ..." Vasya went on, "I have never spoken to you of this,
Arkady.... Arkady, you make me so happy with your affection, without you
I could not live,--no, no, don't say anything, Arkady, let me squeeze
your hand, let me ... tha...ank ... you...." Again Vasya could not
finish.

Arkady Ivanovitch longed to throw himself on Vasya's neck, but as they
were crossing the road and heard almost in their ears a shrill: "Hi!
there!" they ran frightened and excited to the pavement.

Arkady Ivanovitch was positively relieved. He set down Vasya's outburst
of gratitude to the exceptional circumstances of the moment. He was
vexed. He felt that he had done so little for Vasya hitherto. He felt
actually ashamed of himself when Vasya began thanking him for so little.
But they had all their lives before them, and Arkady Ivanovitch breathed
more freely.

The Artemyevs had quite given up expecting them. The proof of it was
that they had already sat down to tea! And the old, it seems, are
sometimes more clear-sighted than the young, even when the young are so
exceptional. Lizanka had very earnestly maintained, "He isn't coming, he
isn't coming, Mamma; I feel in my heart he is not coming;" while her
mother on the contrary declared "that she had a feeling that he would
certainly come, that he would not stay away, that he would run round,
that he could have no office work now, on New Year's Eve." Even as
Lizanka opened the door she did not in the least expect to see them, and
greeted them breathlessly, with her heart throbbing like a captured
bird's, flushing and turning as red as a cherry, a fruit which she
wonderfully resembled. Good Heavens, what a surprise it was! What a
joyful "Oh!" broke from her lips. "Deceiver! My darling!" she cried,
throwing her arms round Vasya's neck. But imagine her amazement, her
sudden confusion: just behind Vasya, as though trying to hide behind his
back, stood Arkady Ivanovitch, a trifle out of countenance. It must be
admitted that he was awkward in the company of women, very awkward
indeed, in fact on one occasion something occurred ... but of that later.
You must put yourself in his place, however. There was nothing to laugh
at; he was standing in the entry, in his goloshes and overcoat, and in a
cap with flaps over the ears, which he would have hastened to pull off,
but he had, all twisted round in a hideous way, a yellow knitted scarf,
which, to make things worse, was knotted at the back. He had to
disentangle all this, to take it off as quickly as possible, to show
himself to more advantage, for there is no one who does not prefer to
show himself to advantage. And then Vasya, vexatious insufferable Vasya,
of course always the same dear kind Vasya, but now insufferable,
ruthless Vasya. "Here," he shouted, "Lizanka, I have brought you my
Arkady? What do you think of him? He is my best friend, embrace him,
kiss him, Lizanka, give him a kiss in advance; afterwards--you will know
him better--you can take it back again."

Well, what, I ask you, was Arkady Ivanovitch to do? And he had only
untwisted half of the scarf so far. I really am sometimes ashamed of
Vasya's excess of enthusiasm; it is, of course, the sign of a good
heart, but ... it's awkward, not nice!

At last both went in.... The mother was unutterably delighted to make
Arkady Ivanovitch's acquaintance, "she had heard so much about him, she
had...." But she did not finish. A joyful "Oh!" ringing musically
through the room interrupted her in the middle of a sentence. Good
Heavens! Lizanka was standing before the cap which had suddenly been
unfolded before her gaze; she clasped her hands with the utmost
simplicity, smiling such a smile.... Oh, Heavens! why had not Madame
Leroux an even lovelier cap?

Oh, Heavens! but where could you find a lovelier cap? It was quite
first-rate. Where could you get a better one? I mean it seriously. This
ingratitude on the part of lovers moves me, in fact, to indignation and
even wounds me a little. Why, look at it for yourself, reader, look,
what could be more beautiful than this little love of a cap? Come, look
at it.... But, no, no, my strictures are uncalled for; they had by now
all agreed with me; it had been a momentary aberration; the blindness,
the delirium of feeling; I am ready to forgive them.... But then you
must look.... You must excuse me, kind reader, I am still talking about
the cap: made of tulle, light as a feather, a broad cherry-coloured
ribbon covered with lace passing between the tulle and the ruche, and at
the back two wide long ribbons--they would fall down a little below the
nape of the neck.... All that the cap needed was to be tilted a little
to the back of the head; come, look at it; I ask you, after that ... but
I see you are not looking ... you think it does not matter. You are
looking in a different direction.... You are looking at two big tears,
big as pearls, that rose in two jet black eyes, quivered for one instant
on the eyelashes, and then dropped on the ethereal tulle of which Madame
Leroux's artistic masterpiece was composed.... And again I feel vexed,
those two tears were scarcely a tribute to the cap.... No, to my mind,
such a gift should be given in cool blood, as only then can its full
worth be appreciated. I am, I confess, dear reader, entirely on the side
of the cap.

They sat down--Vasya with Lizanka and the old mother with Arkady
Ivanovitch; they began to talk, and Arkady Ivanovitch did himself
credit, I am glad to say that for him. One would hardly, indeed, have
expected it of him. After a couple of words about Vasya he most
successfully turned the conversation to Yulian Mastakovitch, his patron.
And he talked so cleverly, so cleverly that the subject was not
exhausted for an hour. You ought to have seen with what dexterity, what
tact, Arkady Ivanovitch touched upon certain peculiarities of Yulian
Mastakovitch which directly or indirectly affected Vasya. The mother was
fascinated, genuinely fascinated; she admitted it herself; she purposely
called Vasya aside, and said to him that his friend was a most excellent
and charming young man, and, what was of most account, such a serious,
steady young man. Vasya almost laughed aloud with delight. He remembered
how the serious Arkady had tumbled him on his bed for a quarter of an
hour. Then the mother signed to Vasya to follow her quietly and
cautiously into the next room. It must be admitted that she treated
Lizanka rather unfairly: she behaved treacherously to her daughter, in
the fullness of her heart, of course, and showed Vasya on the sly the
present Lizanka was preparing to give him for the New Year. It was a
paper-case, embroidered in beads and gold in a very choice design: on
one side was depicted a stag, absolutely lifelike, running swiftly, and
so well done! On the other side was the portrait of a celebrated
General, also an excellent likeness. I cannot describe Vasya's raptures.
Meanwhile, time was not being wasted in the parlour. Lizanka went
straight up to Arkady Ivanovitch. She took his hand, she thanked him for
something, and Arkady Ivanovitch gathered that she was referring to her
precious Vasya. Lizanka was, indeed, deeply touched: she had heard that
Arkady Ivanovitch was such a true friend of her betrothed, so loved him,
so watched over him, guiding him at every step with helpful advice, that
she, Lizanka, could hardly help thanking him, could not refrain from
feeling grateful, and hoping that Arkady Ivanovitch might like her, if
only half as well as Vasya. Then she began questioning him as to whether
Vasya was careful of his health, expressed some apprehensions in regard
to his marked impulsiveness of character, and his lack of knowledge of
men and practical life; she said that she would in time watch over him
religiously, that she would take care of and cherish his lot, and
finally, she hoped that Arkady Ivanovitch would not leave them, but
would live with them.

"We three shall live like one," she cried, with extremely naïve
enthusiasm.

But it was time to go. They tried, of course, to keep them, but Vasya
answered point blank that it was impossible. Arkady Ivanovitch said the
same. The reason was, of course, inquired into, and it came out at once
that there was work to be done entrusted to Vasya by Yulian
Mastakovitch, urgent, necessary, dreadful work, which must be handed in
on the morning of the next day but one, and that it was not only
unfinished, but had been completely laid aside. The mamma sighed when
she heard of this, while Lizanka was positively scared, and hurried
Vasya off in alarm. The last kiss lost nothing from this haste; though
brief and hurried it was only the more warm and ardent. At last they
parted and the two friends set off home.

Both began at once confiding to each other their impressions as soon as
they found themselves in the street. And could they help it? Indeed,
Arkady Ivanovitch was in love, desperately in love, with Lizanka. And to
whom could he better confide his feelings than to Vasya, the happy man
himself. And so he did; he was not bashful, but confessed everything at
once to Vasya. Vasya laughed heartily and was immensely delighted, and
even observed that this was all that was needed to make them greater
friends than ever. "You have guessed my feelings, Vasya," said Arkady
Ivanovitch. "Yes, I love her as I love you; she will be my good angel as
well as yours, for the radiance of your happiness will be shed on me,
too, and I can bask in its warmth. She will keep house for me too,
Vasya; my happiness will be in her hands. Let her keep house for me as
she will for you. Yes, friendship for you is friendship for her; you are
not separable for me now, only I shall have two beings like you instead
of one...." Arkady paused in the fullness of his feelings, while Vasya
was shaken to the depths of his being by his friend's words. The fact
is, he had never expected anything of the sort from Arkady. Arkady
Ivanovitch was not very great at talking as a rule, he was not fond of
dreaming, either; now he gave way to the liveliest, freshest,
rainbow-tinted day-dreams. "How I will protect and cherish you both," he
began again. "To begin with, Vasya, I will be godfather to all your
children, every one of them; and secondly, Vasya, we must bestir
ourselves about the future. We must buy furniture, and take a lodging so
that you and she and I can each have a little room to ourselves. Do you
know, Vasya, I'll run about to-morrow and look at the notices, on the
gates! Three ... no, two rooms, we should not need more. I really
believe, Vasya, I talked nonsense this morning, there will be money
enough; why, as soon as I glanced into her eyes I calculated at once
that there would be enough to live on. It will all be for her. Oh, how
we will work! Now, Vasya, we might venture up to twenty-five roubles for
rent. A lodging is everything, brother. Nice rooms ... and at once a man
is cheerful, and his dreams are of the brightest hues. And, besides,
Lizanka will keep the purse for both of us: not a farthing will be
wasted. Do you suppose I would go to a restaurant? What do you take me
for? Not on any account. And then we shall get a bonus and reward, for
we shall be zealous in the service--oh! how we shall work, like oxen
toiling in the fields.... Only fancy," and Arkady Ivanovitch's voice was
faint with pleasure, "all at once and quite unexpected, twenty-five or
thirty roubles.... Whenever there's an extra, there'll be a cap or a
scarf or a pair of little stockings. She must knit me a scarf; look what
a horrid one I've got, the nasty yellow thing, it did me a bad turn
to-day! And you wore a nice one, Vasya, to introduce me while I had my
head in a halter.... Though never mind that now. And look here, I
undertake all the silver. I am bound to give you some little
present,--that will be an honour, that will flatter my vanity.... My
bonuses won't fail me, surely; you don't suppose they would give them to
Skorohodov? No fear, they won't be landed in that person's pocket. I'll
buy you silver spoons, brother, good knives--not silver knives, but
thoroughly good ones; and a waistcoat, that is a waistcoat for myself. I
shall be best man, of course. Only now, brother, you must keep at it,
you must keep at it. I shall stand over you with a stick, brother,
to-day and to-morrow and all night; I shall worry you to work. Finish,
make haste and finish, brother. And then again to spend the evening, and
then again both of us happy; we will go in for loto. We will spend the
evening there--oh, it's jolly! Oh, the devil! How, vexing it is I can't
help you. I should like to take it and write it all for you.... Why is
it our handwriting is not alike?"

"Yes," answered Vasya. "Yes, I must make haste. I think it must be
eleven o'clock; we must make haste.... To work!" And saying this, Vasya,
who had been all the time alternately smiling and trying to interrupt
with some enthusiastic rejoinder the flow of his friend's feelings, and
had, in short, been showing the most cordial response, suddenly
subsided, sank into silence, and almost ran along the street. It seemed
as though some burdensome idea had suddenly chilled his feverish head;
he seemed all at once dispirited.

Arkady Ivanovitch felt quite uneasy; he scarcely got an answer to his
hurried questions from Vasya, who confined himself to a word or two,
sometimes an irrelevant exclamation.

"Why, what is the matter with you, Vasya?" he cried at last, hardly able
to keep up with him. "Can you really be so uneasy?"

"Oh, brother, that's enough chatter!" Vasya answered, with vexation.

"Don't be depressed, Vasya--come, come," Arkady interposed. "Why, I have
known you write much more in a shorter time! What's the matter? You've
simply a talent for it! You can write quickly in an emergency; they are
not going to lithograph your copy. You've plenty of time!... The only
thing is that you are excited now, and preoccupied, and the work won't
go so easily."

Vasya made no reply, or muttered something to himself, and they both ran
home in genuine anxiety.

Vasya sat down to the papers at once. Arkady Ivanovitch was quiet and
silent; he noiselessly undressed and went to bed, keeping his eyes fixed
on Vasya.... A sort of panic came over him.... "What is the matter with
him?" he thought to himself, looking at Vasya's face that grew whiter
and whiter, at his feverish eyes, at the anxiety that was betrayed in
every movement he made, "why, his hand is shaking ... what a stupid! Why
did I not advise him to sleep for a couple of hours, till he had slept
off his nervous excitement, any way." Vasya had just finished a page, he
raised his eyes, glanced casually at Arkady and at once, looking down,
took up his pen again.

"Listen, Vasya," Arkady Ivanovitch began suddenly, "wouldn't it be best
to sleep a little now? Look, you are in a regular fever."

Vasya glanced at Arkady with vexation, almost with anger, and made no
answer.

"Listen, Vasya, you'll make yourself ill."

Vasya at once changed his mind. "How would it be to have tea, Arkady?"
he said.

"How so? Why?"

"It will do me good. I am not sleepy, I'm not going to bed! I am going
on writing. But now I should like to rest and have a cup of tea, and the
worst moment will be over."

"First-rate, brother Vasya, delightful! Just so. I was wanting to
propose it myself. And I can't think why it did not occur to me to do
so. But I say, Mavra won't get up, she won't wake for anything...."

"True."

"That's no matter, though," cried Arkady Ivanovitch, leaping out of bed.
"I will set the samovar myself. It won't be the first time...."

Arkady Ivanovitch ran to the kitchen and set to work to get the samovar;
Vasya meanwhile went on writing. Arkady Ivanovitch, moreover, dressed
and ran out to the baker's, so that Vasya might have something to
sustain him for the night. A quarter of an hour later the samovar was on
the table. They began drinking tea, but conversation flagged. Vasya
still seemed preoccupied.

"To-morrow," he said at last, as though he had just thought of it, "I
shall have to take my congratulations for the New Year...."

"You need not go at all."

"Oh yes, brother, I must," said Vasya.

"Why, I will sign the visitors' book for you everywhere.... How can you?
You work to-morrow. You must work to-night, till five o'clock in the
morning, as I said, and then get to bed. Or else you will be good for
nothing to-morrow. I'll wake you at eight o'clock, punctually."

"But will it be all right, your signing for me?" said Vasya, half
assenting.

"Why, what could be better? Everyone does it."

"I am really afraid."

"Why, why?"

"It's all right, you know, with other people, but Yulian Mastakovitch
... he has been so kind to me, you know, Arkasha, and when he notices
it's not my own signature----"

"Notices! why, what a fellow you are, really, Vasya! How could he
notice?... Come, you know I can imitate your signature awfully well, and
make just the same flourish to it, upon my word I can. What nonsense!
Who would notice?"

Vasya, made no reply, but emptied his glass hurriedly.... Then he shook
his head doubtfully.

"Vasya, dear boy! Ah, if only we succeed! Vasya, what's the matter with
you, you quite frighten me! Do you know, Vasya, I am not going to bed
now, I am not going to sleep! Show me, have you a great deal left?"

Vasya gave Arkady such a look that his heart sank, and his tongue failed
him.

"Vasya, what is the matter? What are you thinking? Why do you look like
that?"

"Arkady, I really must go to-morrow to wish Yulian Mastakovitch a happy
New Year."

"Well, go then!" said Arkady, gazing at him open-eyed, in uneasy
expectation. "I say, Vasya, do write faster; I am advising you for your
good, I really am! How often Yulian Mastakovitch himself has said that
what he likes particularly about your writing is its legibility. Why, it
is all that Skoroplehin cares for, that writing should be good and
distinct like a copy, so as afterwards to pocket the paper and take it
home for his children to copy; he can't buy copybooks, the blockhead!
Yulian Mastakovitch is always saying, always insisting: 'Legible,
legible, legible!'... What is the matter? Vasya, I really don't know
how to talk to you ... it quite frightens me ... you crush me with your
depression."

"It's all right, it's all right," said Vasya, and he fell back in his
chair as though fainting. Arkady was alarmed.

"Will you have some water? Vasya! Vasya!"

"Don't, don't," said Vasya, pressing his hand. "I am all right, I only
feel sad, I can't tell why. Better talk of something else; let me forget
it."

"Calm yourself, for goodness' sake, calm yourself, Vasya. You will
finish it all right, on my honour, you will. And even if you don't
finish, what will it matter? You talk as though it were a crime!"

"Arkady," said Vasya, looking at his friend with such meaning that
Arkady was quite frightened, for Vasya had never been so agitated
before.... "If I were alone, as I used to be.... No! I don't mean that.
I keep wanting to tell you as a friend, to confide in you.... But why
worry you, though?... You see, Arkady, to some much is given, others do
a little thing as I do. Well, if gratitude, appreciation, is expected of
you ... and you can't give it?"

"Vasya, I don't understand you in the least."

"I have never been ungrateful," Vasya went on softly, as though speaking
to himself, "but if I am incapable of expressing all I feel, it seems as
though ... it seems, Arkady, as though I am really ungrateful, and
that's killing me."

"What next, what next! As though gratitude meant nothing more than your
finishing that copy in time? Just think what you are saying, Vasya? Is
that the whole expression of gratitude?"

Vasya sank into silence at once, and looked open-eyed at Arkady, as
though his unexpected argument had settled all his doubts. He even
smiled, but the same melancholy expression came back to his face at
once. Arkady, taking this smile as a sign that all his uneasiness was
over, and the look that succeeded it as an indication that he was
determined to do better, was greatly relieved.

"Well, brother Arkasha, you will wake up," said Vasya, "keep an eye on
me; if I fall asleep it will be dreadful. I'll set to work now....
Arkasha?"

"What?"

"Oh, it's nothing, I only ... I meant...."

Vasya settled himself, and said no more, Arkady got into bed. Neither of
them said one word about their friends, the Artemyevs. Perhaps both of
them felt that they had been a little to blame, and that they ought not
to have gone for their jaunt when they did. Arkady soon fell asleep,
still worried about Vasya. To his own surprise he woke up exactly at
eight o'clock in the morning. Vasya was asleep in his chair with the pen
in his hand, pale and exhausted; the candle had burnt out. Mavra was
busy getting the samovar ready in the kitchen.

"Vasya, Vasya!" Arkady cried in alarm, "when did you fall asleep?"

Vasya opened his eyes and jumped up from his chair.

"Oh!" he cried, "I must have fallen asleep...."

He flew to the papers--everything was right; all were in order; there
was not a blot of ink, nor spot of grease from the candle on them.

"I think I must have fallen asleep about six o'clock," said Vasya. "How
cold it is in the night! Let us have tea, and I will go on again...."

"Do you feel better?"

"Yes, yes, I'm all right, I'm all right now."

"A happy New Year to you, brother Vasya."

"And to you too, brother, the same to you, dear boy."

They embraced each other. Vasya's chin was quivering and his eyes were
moist. Arkady Ivanovitch was silent, he felt sad. They drank their tea
hastily.

"Arkady, I've made up my mind, I am going myself to Yulian
Mastakovitch."

"Why, he wouldn't notice----"

"But my conscience feels ill at ease, brother."

"But you know it's for his sake you are sitting here; it's for his sake
you are wearing yourself out."

"Enough!"

"Do you know what, brother, I'll go round and see...."

"Whom?" asked Vasya.

"The Artemyevs. I'll take them your good wishes for the New Year as well
as mine."

"My dear fellow! Well, I'll stay here; and I see it's a good idea of
yours; I shall be working here, I shan't waste my time. Wait one minute,
I'll write a note."

"Yes, do brother, do, there's plenty of time. I've still to wash and
shave and to brush my best coat. Well, Vasya, we are going to be
contented and happy. Embrace me, Vasya."

"Ah, if only we may, brother...."

"Does Mr. Shumkov live here?" they heard a child's voice on the stairs.

"Yes, my dear, yes," said Mavra, showing the visitor in.

"What's that? What is it?" cried Vasya, leaping up from the table and
rushing to the entry, "Petinka, you?"

"Good morning, I have the honour to wish you a happy New Year, Vassily
Petrovitch," said a pretty boy of ten years old with curly black hair.
"Sister sends you her love, and so does Mamma, and Sister told me to
give you a kiss for her."

Vasya caught the messenger up in the air and printed a long,
enthusiastic kiss on his lips, which were very much like Lizanka's.

"Kiss him, Arkady," he said handing Petya to him, and without touching
the ground the boy was transferred to Arkady Ivanovitch's powerful and
eager arms.

"Will you have some breakfast, dear?"

"Thank-you, very much. We have had it already, we got up early to-day,
the others have gone to church. Sister was two hours curling my hair,
and pomading it, washing me and mending my trousers, for I tore them
yesterday, playing with Sashka in the street, we were snowballing."

"Well, well, well!"

"So she dressed me up to come and see you, and then pomaded my head and
then gave me a regular kissing. She said: 'Go to Vasya, wish him a happy
New Year, and ask whether they are happy, whether they had a good night,
and ...' to ask something else,--oh yes! whether you had finished the
work you spoke of yesterday ... when you were there. Oh, I've got it all
written down," said the boy, reading from a slip of paper which he took
out of his pocket. "Yes, they were uneasy."

"It will be finished! It will be! Tell her that it will be. I shall
finish it, on my word of honour!"

"And something else.... Oh yes, I forgot. Sister sent a little note and
a present, and I was forgetting it!..."

"My goodness! Oh, you little darling! Where is it? where is it? That's
it, oh! Look, brother, see what she writes. The dar--ling, the precious!
You know I saw there yesterday a paper-case for me; it's not finished,
so she says, 'I am sending you a lock of my hair, and the other will
come later.' Look, brother, look!"

And overwhelmed with rapture he showed Arkady Ivanovitch a curl of
luxuriant, jet-black hair; then he kissed it fervently and put it in his
breast pocket, nearest his heart.

"Vasya, I shall get you a locket for that curl," Arkady Ivanovitch said
resolutely at last.

"And we are going to have hot veal, and to-morrow brains. Mamma wants to
make cakes ... but we are not going to have millet porridge," said the
boy, after a moment's thought, to wind up his budget of interesting
items.

"Oh! what a pretty boy," cried Arkady Ivanovitch. "Vasya, you are the
happiest of mortals."

The boy finished his tea, took from Vasya a note, a thousand kisses, and
went out happy and frolicsome as before.

"Well, brother," began Arkady Ivanovitch, highly delighted, "you see how
splendid it all is; you see. Everything is going well, don't be
downcast, don't be uneasy. Go ahead! Get it done, Vasya, get it done.
I'll be home at two o'clock. I'll go round to them, and then to Yulian
Mastakovitch."

"Well, good-bye, brother; good-bye.... Oh! if only.... Very good, you
go, very good," said Vasya, "then I really won't go to Yulian
Mastakovitch."

"Good-bye."

"Stay, brother, stay, tell them ... well, whatever you think fit. Kiss
her ... and give me a full account of everything afterwards."

"Come, come--of course, I know all about it. This happiness has upset
you. The suddenness of it all; you've not been yourself since yesterday.
You have not got over the excitement of yesterday. Well, it's settled.
Now try and get over it, Vasya. Good-bye, good-bye!"

At last the friends parted. All the morning Arkady Ivanovitch was
preoccupied, and could think of nothing but Vasya. He knew his weak,
highly nervous character. "Yes, this happiness has upset him, I was
right there," he said to himself. "Upon my word, he has made me quite
depressed, too, that man will make a tragedy of anything! What a
feverish creature! Oh, I must save him! I must save him!" said Arkady,
not noticing that he himself was exaggerating into something serious a
slight trouble, in reality quite trivial. Only at eleven o'clock he
reached the porter's lodge of Yulian Mastakovitch's house, to add his
modest name to the long list of illustrious persons who had written
their names on a sheet of blotted and scribbled paper in the porter's
lodge. What was his surprise when he saw just above his own the
signature of Vasya Shumkov! It amazed him. "What's the matter with him?"
he thought. Arkady Ivanovitch, who had just been so buoyant with hope,
came out feeling upset. There was certainly going to be trouble, but
how? And in what form?

He reached the Artemyevs with gloomy forebodings; he seemed
absent-minded from the first, and after talking a little with Lizanka
went away with tears in his eyes; he was really anxious about Vasya. He
went home running, and on the Neva came full tilt upon Vasya himself.
The latter, too, was uneasy.

"Where are you going?" cried Arkady Ivanovitch.

Vasya stopped as though he had been caught in a crime.

"Oh, it's nothing, brother, I wanted to go for a walk."

"You could not stand it, and have been to the Artemyevs? Oh, Vasya,
Vasya! Why did you go to Yulian Mastakovitch?"

Vasya did not answer, but then with a wave of his hand, he said:
"Arkady, I don't know what is the matter with me. I...."

"Come, come, Vasya. I know what it is. Calm yourself. You've been
excited, and overwrought ever since yesterday. Only think, it's not much
to bear. Everybody's fond of you, everybody's ready to do anything for
you; your work is getting on all right; you will get it done, you will
certainly get it done. I know that you have been imagining something,
you have had apprehensions about something...."

"No, it's all right, it's all right...."

"Do you remember, Vasya, do you remember it was the same with you once
before; do you remember, when you got your promotion, in your joy and
thankfulness you were so zealous that you spoilt all your work for a
week? It is just the same with you now."

"Yes, yes, Arkady; but now it is different, it is not that at all."

"How is it different? And very likely the work is not urgent at all,
while you are killing yourself...."

"It's nothing, it's nothing. I am all right, it's nothing. Well, come
along!"

"Why, are you going home, and not to them?"

"Yes, brother, how could I have the face to turn up there?... I have
changed my mind. It was only that I could not stay on alone without you;
now you are coming back with me I'll sit down to write again. Let us
go!"

They walked along and for some time were silent. Vasya was in haste.

"Why don't you ask me about them?" said Arkady Ivanovitch.

"Oh, yes! Well, Arkasha, what about them?"

"Vasya, you are not like yourself."

"Oh, I am all right, I am all right. Tell me everything, Arkasha," said
Vasya, in an imploring voice, as though to avoid further explanations.
Arkady Ivanovitch sighed. He felt utterly at a loss, looking at Vasya.

His account of their friends roused Vasya. He even grew talkative. They
had dinner together. Lizanka's mother had filled Arkady Ivanovitch's
pockets with little cakes, and eating them the friends grew more
cheerful. After dinner Vasya promised to take a nap, so as to sit up all
night. He did, in fact, lie down. In the morning, some one whom it was
impossible to refuse had invited Arkady Ivanovitch to tea. The friends
parted. Arkady promised to come back as soon as he could, by eight
o'clock if possible. The three hours of separation seemed to him like
three years. At last he got away and rushed back to Vasya. When he went
into the room, he found it in darkness. Vasya was not at home. He asked
Mavra. Mavra said that he had been writing all the time, and had not
slept at all, then he had paced up and down the room, and after that, an
hour before, he had run out, saying he would be back in half-an-hour;
"and when, says he, Arkady Ivanovitch comes in, tell him, old woman,
says he," Mavra told him in conclusion, "that I have gone out for a
walk," and he repeated the order three or four times.

"He is at the Artemyevs," thought Arkady Ivanovitch, and he shook his
head.

A minute later he jumped up with renewed hope.

"He has simply finished," he thought, "that's all it is; he couldn't
wait, but ran off there. But, no! he would have waited for me.... Let's
have a peep what he has there."

He lighted a candle, and ran to Vasya's writing-table: the work had made
progress and it looked as though there were not much left to do. Arkady
Ivanovitch was about to investigate further, when Vasya himself walked
in....

"Oh, you are here?" he cried, with a start of dismay.

Arkady Ivanovitch was silent. He was afraid to question Vasya. The
latter dropped his eyes and remained silent too, as he began sorting the
papers. At last their eyes met. The look in Vasya's was so beseeching,
imploring, and broken, that Arkady shuddered when he saw it. His heart
quivered and was full.

"Vasya, my dear boy, what is it? What's wrong?" he cried, rushing to him
and squeezing him in his arms. "Explain to me, I don't understand you,
and your depression. What is the matter with you, my poor, tormented
boy? What is it? Tell me all about it, without hiding anything. It can't
be only this----"

Vasya held him tight and could say nothing. He could scarcely breathe.

"Don't, Vasya, don't! Well, if you don't finish it, what then? I don't
understand you; tell me your trouble. You see it is for your sake I....
Oh dear! oh dear!" he said, walking up and down the room and clutching
at everything he came across, as though seeking at once some remedy for
Vasya. "I will go to Yulian Mastakovitch instead of you to-morrow. I
will ask him--entreat him--to let you have another day. I will explain
it all to him, anything, if it worries you so...."

"God forbid!" cried Vasya, and turned as white as the wall. He could
scarcely stand on his feet.

"Vasya! Vasya!"

Vasya pulled himself together. His lips were quivering; he tried to say
something, but could only convulsively squeeze Arkady's hand in silence.
His hand was cold. Arkady stood facing him, full of anxious and
miserable suspense. Vasya raised his eyes again.

"Vasya, God bless you, Vasya! You wring my heart, my dear boy, my
friend."

Tears gushed from Vasya's eyes; he flung himself on Arkady's bosom.

"I have deceived you, Arkady," he said. "I have deceived you. Forgive
me, forgive me! I have been faithless to your friendship...."

"What is it, Vasya? What is the matter?" asked Arkady, in real alarm.

"Look!"

And with a gesture of despair Vasya tossed out of the drawer on to the
table six thick manuscripts, similar to the one he had copied.

"What's this?"

"What I have to get through by the day after to-morrow. I haven't done a
quarter! Don't ask me, don't ask me how it has happened," Vasya went on,
speaking at once of what was distressing him so terribly. "Arkady, dear
friend, I don't know myself what came over me. I feel as though I were
coming out of a dream. I have wasted three weeks doing nothing. I kept
... I ... kept going to see her.... My heart was aching, I was tormented
by ... the uncertainty ... I could not write. I did not even think about
it. Only now, when happiness is at hand for me, I have come to my
senses."

"Vasya," began Arkady Ivanovitch resolutely, "Vasya, I will save you. I
understand it all. It's a serious matter; I will save you. Listen!
listen to me: I will go to Yulian Mastakovitch to-morrow.... Don't shake
your head; no, listen! I will tell him exactly how it has all been; let
me do that ... I will explain to him.... I will go into everything. I
will tell him how crushed you are, how you are worrying yourself."

"Do you know that you are killing me now?" Vasya brought out, turning
cold with horror.

Arkady Ivanovitch turned pale, but at once controlling himself, laughed.

"Is that all? Is that all?" he said. "Upon my word, Vasya, upon my word!
Aren't you ashamed? Come, listen! I see that I am grieving you. You see
I understand you; I know what is passing in your heart. Why, we have
been living together for five years, thank God! You are such a kind,
soft-hearted fellow, but weak, unpardonably weak. Why, even Lizaveta
Mikalovna has noticed it. And you are a dreamer, and that's a bad thing,
too; you may go from bad to worse, brother. I tell you, I know what you
want! You would like Yulian Mastakovitch, for instance, to be beside
himself and, maybe, to give a ball, too, from joy, because you are going
to get married.... Stop, stop! you are frowning. You see that at one
word from me you are offended on Yulian Mastakovitch's account. I'll let
him alone. You know I respect him just as much as you do. But argue as
you may, you can't prevent my thinking that you would like there to be
no one unhappy in the whole world when you are getting married.... Yes,
brother, you must admit that you would like me, for instance, your best
friend, to come in for a fortune of a hundred thousand all of a sudden,
you would like all the enemies in the world to be suddenly, for no rhyme
or reason, reconciled, so that in their joy they might all embrace one
another in the middle of the street, and then, perhaps, come here to
call on you. Vasya, my dear boy, I am not laughing; it is true; you've
said as much to me long ago, in different ways. Because you are happy,
you want every one, absolutely every one, to become happy at once. It
hurts you and troubles you to be happy alone. And so you want at once to
do your utmost to be worthy of that happiness, and maybe to do some
great deed to satisfy your conscience. Oh! I understand how ready you
are to distress yourself for having suddenly been remiss just where you
ought to have shown your zeal, your capacity ... well, maybe your
gratitude, as you say. It is very bitter for you to think that Yulian
Mastakovitch may frown and even be angry when he sees that you have not
justified the expectations he had of you. It hurts you to think that you
may hear reproaches from the man you look upon as your benefactor--and
at such a moment! when your heart is full of joy and you don't know on
whom to lavish your gratitude.... Isn't that true? It is, isn't it?"

Arkady Ivanovitch, whose voice was trembling, paused, and drew a deep
breath.

Vasya looked affectionately at his friend. A smile passed over his lips.
His face even lighted up, as though with a gleam of hope.

"Well, listen, then," Arkady Ivanovitch began again, growing more
hopeful, "there's no necessity that you should forfeit Yulian
Mastakovitch's favour.... Is there, dear boy? Is there any question of
it? And since it is so," said Arkady, jumping up, "I shall sacrifice
myself for you. I am going to-morrow to Yulian Mastakovitch, and don't
oppose me. You magnify your failure to a crime, Vasya. Yulian
Mastakovitch is magnanimous and merciful, and, what is more, he is not
like you. He will listen to you and me, and get us out of our trouble,
brother Vasya. Well, are you calmer?"

Vasya pressed his friend's hands with tears in his eyes.

"Hush, hush, Arkady," he said, "the thing is settled. I haven't
finished, so very well; if I haven't finished, I haven't finished, and
there's no need for you to go. I will tell him all about it, I will go
myself. I am calmer now, I am perfectly calm; only you mustn't go....
But listen...."

"Vasya, my dear boy," Arkady Ivanovitch cried joyfully, "I judged from
what you said. I am glad that you have thought better of things and have
recovered yourself. But whatever may befall you, whatever happens, I am
with you, remember that. I see that it worries you to think of my
speaking to Yulian Mastakovitch--and I won't say a word, not a word, you
shall tell him yourself. You see, you shall go to-morrow.... Oh no, you
had better not go, you'll go on writing here, you see, and I'll find out
about this work, whether it is very urgent or not, whether it must be
done by the time or not, and if you don't finish it in time what will
come of it. Then I will run back to you. Do you see, do you see! There
is still hope; suppose the work is not urgent--it may be all right.
Yulian Mastakovitch may not remember, then all is saved."

Vasya shook his head doubtfully. But his grateful eyes never left his
friend's face.

"Come, that's enough, I am so weak, so tired," he said, sighing. "I
don't want to think about it. Let us talk of something else. I won't
write either now; do you know I'll only finish two short pages just to
get to the end of a passage. Listen ... I have long wanted to ask you,
how is it you know me so well?"

Tears dropped from Vasya's eyes on Arkady's hand.

"If you knew, Vasya, how fond I am of you, you would not ask that--yes!"

"Yes, yes, Arkady, I don't know that, because I don't know why you are
so fond of me. Yes, Arkady, do you know, even your love has been killing
me? Do you know, ever so many times, particularly when I am thinking of
you in bed (for I always think of you when I am falling asleep), I shed
tears, and my heart throbs at the thought ... at the thought.... Well,
at the thought that you are so fond of me, while I can do nothing to
relieve my heart, can do nothing to repay you."

"You see, Vasya, you see what a fellow you are! Why, how upset you are
now," said Arkady, whose heart ached at that moment and who remembered
the scene in the street the day before.

"Nonsense, you want me to be calm, but I never have been so calm and
happy! Do you know.... Listen, I want to tell you all about it, but I am
afraid of wounding you.... You keep scolding me and being vexed; and I
am afraid.... See how I am trembling now, I don't know why. You see,
this is what I want to say. I feel as though I had never known myself
before--yes! Yes, I only began to understand other people too,
yesterday. I did not feel or appreciate things fully, brother. My heart
... was hard.... Listen how has it happened, that I have never done good
to any one, any one in the world, because I couldn't--I am not even
pleasant to look at.... But everybody does me good! You, to begin with:
do you suppose I don't see that? Only I said nothing; only I said
nothing."

"Hush, Vasya!"

"Oh, Arkasha! ... it's all right," Vasya interrupted, hardly able to
articulate for tears. "I talked to you yesterday about Yulian
Mastakovitch. And you know yourself how stern and severe he is, even you
have come in for a reprimand from him; yet he deigned to jest with me
yesterday, to show his affection, and kind-heartedness, which he
prudently conceals from every one...."

"Come, Vasya, that only shows you deserve your good fortune."

"Oh, Arkasha! How I longed to finish all this.... No, I shall ruin my
good luck! I feel that! Oh no, not through that," Vasya added, seeing
that Arkady glanced at the heap of urgent work lying on the table,
"that's nothing, that's only paper covered with writing ... it's
nonsense! That matter's settled.... I went to see them to-day, Arkasha;
I did not go in. I felt depressed and sad. I simply stood at the door.
She was playing the piano, I listened. You see, Arkady," he went on,
dropping his voice, "I did not dare to go in."

"I say, Vasya--what is the matter with you? You look at one so
strangely."

"Oh, it's nothing, I feel a little sick; my legs are trembling; it's
because I sat up last night. Yes! Everything looks green before my eyes.
It's here, here----"

He pointed to his heart. He fainted. When he came to himself Arkady
tried to take forcible measures. He tried to compel him to go to bed.
Nothing would induce Vasya to consent. He shed tears, wrung his hands,
wanted to write, was absolutely set on finishing his two pages. To avoid
exciting him Arkady let him sit down to the work.

"Do you know," said Vasya, as he settled himself in his place, "an idea
has occurred to me? There is hope."

He smiled to Arkady, and his pale face lighted up with a gleam of hope.

"I will take him what is done the day after to-morrow. About the rest I
will tell a lie. I will say it has been burnt, that it has been sopped
in water, that I have lost it.... That, in fact, I have not finished it;
I cannot lie. I will explain, do you know, what? I'll explain to him all
about it. I will tell him how it was that I could not. I'll tell him
about my love; he has got married himself just lately, he'll understand
me. I will do it all, of course, respectfully, quietly; he will see my
tears and be touched by them...."

"Yes, of course, you must go, you must go and explain to him.... But
there's no need of tears! Tears for what? Really, Vasya, you quite scare
me."

"Yes, I'll go, I'll go. But now let me write, let me write, Arkasha. I
am not interfering with any one, let me write!"

Arkady flung himself on the bed. He had no confidence in Vasya, no
confidence at all. "Vasya was capable of anything, but to ask
forgiveness for what? how? That was not the point. The point was, that
Vasya had not carried out his obligations, that Vasya felt guilty _in
his own eyes_, felt that he was ungrateful to destiny, that Vasya was
crushed, overwhelmed by happiness and thought himself unworthy of it;
that, in fact, he was simply trying to find an excuse to go off his head
on that point, and that he had not recovered from the unexpectedness of
what had happened the day before; that's what it is," thought Arkady
Ivanovitch. "I must save him. I must reconcile him to himself. He will
be his own ruin." He thought and thought, and resolved to go at once
next day to Yulian Mastakovitch, and to tell him all about it.

Vasya was sitting writing. Arkady Ivanovitch, worn out, lay down to
think things over again, and only woke at daybreak.

"Damnation! Again!" he cried, looking at Vasya; the latter was still
sitting writing.

Arkady rushed up to him, seized him and forcibly put him to bed. Vasya
was smiling: his eyes were closing with sleep. He could hardly speak.

"I wanted to go to bed," he said. "Do you know, Arkady, I have an idea;
I shall finish. I made my pen go faster! I could not have sat at it any
longer; wake me at eight o'clock."

Without finishing his sentence, he dropped asleep and slept like the
dead.

"Mavra," said Arkady Ivanovitch to Mavra, who came in with the tea, "he
asked to be waked in an hour. Don't wake him on any account! Let him
sleep ten hours, if he can. Do you understand?"

"I understand, sir."

"Don't get the dinner, don't bring in the wood, don't make a noise or it
will be the worse for you. If he asks for me, tell him I have gone to
the office--do you understand?"

"I understand, bless you, sir; let him sleep and welcome! I am glad my
gentlemen should sleep well, and I take good care of their things. And
about that cup that was broken, and you blamed me, your honour, it
wasn't me, it was poor pussy broke it, I ought to have kept an eye on
her. 'S-sh, you confounded thing,' I said."

"Hush, be quiet, be quiet!"

Arkady Ivanovitch followed Mavra out into the kitchen, asked for the key
and locked her up there. Then he went to the office. On the way he
considered how he could present himself before Yulian Mastakovitch, and
whether it would be appropriate and not impertinent. He went into the
office timidly, and timidly inquired whether His Excellency were there;
receiving the answer that he was not and would not be, Arkady Ivanovitch
instantly thought of going to his flat, but reflected very prudently
that if Yulian Mastakovitch had not come to the office he would
certainly be busy at home. He remained. The hours seemed to him endless.
Indirectly he inquired about the work entrusted to Shumkov, but no one
knew anything about this. All that was known was that Yulian
Mastakovitch did employ him on special jobs, but what they were--no one
could say. At last it struck three o'clock, and Arkady Ivanovitch rushed
out, eager to get home. In the vestibule he was met by a clerk, who told
him that Vassily Petrovitch Shumkov had come about one o'clock and
asked, the clerk added, "whether you were here, and whether Yulian
Mastakovitch had been here." Hearing this Arkady Ivanovitch took a
sledge and hastened home beside himself with alarm.

Shumkov was at home. He was walking about the room in violent
excitement. Glancing at Arkady Ivanovitch, he immediately controlled
himself, reflected, and hastened to conceal his emotion. He sat down to
his papers without a word. He seemed to avoid his friend's questions,
seemed to be bothered by them, to be pondering to himself on some plan,
and deciding to conceal his decision, because he could not reckon
further on his friend's affection. This struck Arkady, and his heart
ached with a poignant and oppressive pain. He sat on the bed and began
turning over the leaves of some book, the only one he had in his
possession, keeping his eye on poor Vasya. But Vasya remained
obstinately silent, writing, and not raising his head. So passed several
hours, and Arkady's misery reached an extreme point. At last, at eleven
o'clock, Vasya lifted his head and looked with a fixed, vacant stare at
Arkady. Arkady waited. Two or three minutes passed; Vasya did not speak.

"Vasya!" cried Arkady.

Vasya made no answer.

"Vasya!" he repeated, jumping up from the bed, "Vasya, what is the
matter with you? What is it?" he cried, running up to him.

Vasya raised his eyes and again looked at him with the same vacant,
fixed stare.

"He's in a trance!" thought Arkady, trembling all over with fear. He
seized a bottle of water, raised Vasya, poured some water on his head,
moistened his temples, rubbed his hands in his own--and Vasya came to
himself. "Vasya, Vasya!" cried Arkady, unable to restrain his tears.
"Vasya, save yourself, rouse yourself, rouse yourself!..." He could say
no more, but held him tight in his arms. A look as of some oppressive
sensation passed over Vasya's face; he rubbed his forehead and clutched
at his head, as though he were afraid it would burst.

"I don't know what is the matter with me," he added, at last. "I feel
torn to pieces. Come, it's all right, it's all right! Give over, Arkady;
don't grieve," he repeated, looking at him with sad, exhausted eyes.
"Why be so anxious? Come!"

"You, you comforting me!" cried Arkady, whose heart was torn. "Vasya,"
he said at last, "lie down and have a little nap, won't you? Don't wear
yourself out for nothing! You'll set to work better afterwards."

"Yes, yes," said Vasya, "by all means, I'll lie down, very good. Yes!
you see I meant to finish, but now I've changed my mind, yes...."

And Arkady led him to the bed.

"Listen, Vasya," he said firmly, "we must settle this matter finally.
Tell me what were you thinking about?"

"Oh!" said Vasya, with a flourish of his weak hand turning over on the
other side.

"Come, Vasya, come, make up your mind. I don't want to hurt you. I can't
be silent any longer. You won't sleep till you've made up your mind, I
know."

"As you like, as you like," Vasya repeated enigmatically.

"He will give in," thought Arkady Ivanovitch.

"Attend to me, Vasya," he said, "remember what I say, and I will save
you to-morrow; to-morrow I will decide your fate! What am I saying, your
fate? You have so frightened me, Vasya, that I am using your own words.
Fate, indeed! It's simply nonsense, rubbish! You don't want to lose
Yulian Mastakovitch's favour--affection, if you like. No! And you won't
lose it, you will see. I----"

Arkady Ivanovitch would have said more, but Vasya interrupted him. He
sat up in bed, put both arms round Arkady Ivanovitch's neck and kissed
him.

"Enough," he said in a weak voice, "enough! Say no more about that!"

And again he turned his face to the wall.

"My goodness!" thought Arkady, "my goodness! What is the matter with
him? He is utterly lost. What has he in his mind! He will be his own
undoing."

Arkady looked at him in despair.

"If he were to fall ill," thought Arkady, "perhaps it would be better.
His trouble would pass off with illness, and that might be the best way
of settling the whole business. But what nonsense I am talking. Oh, my
God!"

Meanwhile Vasya seemed to be asleep. Arkady Ivanovitch was relieved. "A
good sign," he thought. He made up his mind to sit beside him all night.
But Vasya was restless; he kept twitching and tossing about on the bed,
and opening his eyes for an instant. At last exhaustion got the upper
hand, he slept like the dead. It was about two o'clock in the morning,
Arkady Ivanovitch began to doze in the chair with his elbow on the
table!

He had a strange and agitated dream. He kept fancying that he was not
asleep, and that Vasya was still lying on the bed. But strange to say,
he fancied that Vasya was pretending, that he was deceiving him, that he
was getting up, stealthily watching him out of the corner of his eye,
and was stealing up to the writing table. Arkady felt a scalding pain at
his heart; he felt vexed and sad and oppressed to see Vasya not trusting
him, hiding and concealing himself from him. He tried to catch hold of
him, to call out, to carry him to the bed. Then Vasya kept shrieking in
his arms, and he laid on the bed a lifeless corpse. He opened his eyes
and woke up; Vasya was sitting before him at the table, writing.

Hardly able to believe his senses, Arkady glanced at the bed; Vasya was
not there. Arkady jumped up in a panic, still under the influence of his
dream. Vasya did not stir; he went on writing. All at once Arkady
noticed with horror that Vasya was moving a dry pen over the paper, was
turning over perfectly blank pages, and hurrying, hurrying to fill up
the paper as though he were doing his work in a most thorough and
efficient way. "No, this is not a trance," thought Arkady Ivanovitch,
and he trembled all over.

"Vasya, Vasya, speak to me," he cried, clutching him by the shoulder.
But Vasya did not speak; he went on as before, scribbling with a dry pen
over the paper.

"At last I have made the pen go faster," he said, without looking up at
Arkady.

Arkady seized his hand and snatched away the pen.

A moan broke from Vasya. He dropped his hand and raised his eyes to
Arkady; then with an air of misery and exhaustion he passed his hand
over his forehead as though he wanted to shake off some leaden weight
that was pressing upon his whole being, and slowly, as though lost in
thought, he let his head sink on his breast.

"Vasya, Vasya!" cried Arkady in despair. "Vasya!"

A minute later Vasya looked at him, tears stood in his large blue eyes,
and his pale, mild face wore a look of infinite suffering. He whispered
something.

"What, what is it?" cried Arkady, bending down to him.

"What for, why are they doing it to me?" whispered Vasya. "What for?
What have I done?"

"Vasya, what is it? What are you afraid of? What is it?" cried Arkady,
wringing his hands in despair.

"Why are they sending me for a soldier?" said Vasya, looking his friend
straight in the face. "Why is it? What have I done?"

Arkady's hair stood on end with horror; he refused to believe his ears.
He stood over him, half dead.

A minute later he pulled himself together. "It's nothing, it's only for
the minute," he said to himself, with pale face and blue, quivering
lips, and he hastened to put on his outdoor things. He meant to run
straight for a doctor. All at once Vasya called to him. Arkady rushed to
him and clasped him in his arms like a mother whose child is being torn
from her.

"Arkady, Arkady, don't tell any one! Don't tell any one, do you hear? It
is my trouble, I must bear it alone."

"What is it--what is it? Rouse yourself, Vasya, rouse yourself!"

Vasya sighed, and slow tears trickled down his cheeks.

"Why kill her? How is she to blame?" he muttered in an agonized,
heartrending voice. "The sin is mine, the sin is mine!"

He was silent for a moment.

"Farewell, my love! Farewell, my love!" he whispered, shaking his
luckless head. Arkady started, pulled himself together and would have
rushed for the doctor. "Let us go, it is time," cried Vasya, carried
away by Arkady's last movement. "Let us go, brother, let us go; I am
ready. You lead the way." He paused and looked at Arkady with a downcast
and mistrustful face.

"Vasya, for goodness' sake, don't follow me! Wait for me here. I will
come back to you directly, directly," said Arkady Ivanovitch, losing his
head and snatching up his cap to run for a doctor. Vasya sat down at
once, he was quiet and docile; but there was a gleam of some desperate
resolution in his eye. Arkady turned back, snatched up from the table an
open penknife, looked at the poor fellow for the last time, and ran out
of the flat.

It was eight o'clock. It had been broad daylight for some time in the
room.

He found no one. He was running about for a full hour. All the doctors
whose addresses he had got from the house porter when he inquired of the
latter whether there were no doctor living in the building, had gone
out, either to their work or on their private affairs. There was one who
saw patients. This one questioned at length and in detail the servant
who announced that Nefedevitch had called, asking him who it was, from
whom he came, what was the matter, and concluded by saying that he could
not go, that he had a great deal to do, and that patients of that kind
ought to be taken to a hospital.

Then Arkady, exhausted, agitated, and utterly taken aback by this turn
of affairs, cursed all the doctors on earth, and rushed home in the
utmost alarm about Vasya. He ran into the flat. Mavra, as though there
were nothing the matter, went on scrubbing the floor, breaking up wood
and preparing to light the stove. He went into the room; there was no
trace of Vasya, he had gone out.

"Which way? Where? Where will the poor fellow be off to?" thought
Arkady, frozen with terror. He began questioning Mavra. She knew
nothing, had neither seen nor heard him go out, God bless him!
Nefedevitch rushed off to the Artemyevs'.

It occurred to him for some reason that he must be there.

It was ten o'clock by the time he arrived. They did not expect him, knew
nothing and had heard nothing. He stood before them frightened,
distressed, and asked where was Vasya? The mother's legs gave way under
her; she sank back on the sofa. Lizanka, trembling with alarm, began
asking what had happened. What could he say? Arkady Ivanovitch got out
of it as best he could, invented some tale which of course was not
believed, and fled, leaving them distressed and anxious. He flew to his
department that he might not be too late there, and he let them know
that steps might be taken at once. On the way it occurred to him that
Vasya would be at Yulian Mastakovitch's. That was more likely than
anything: Arkady had thought of that first of all, even before the
Artemyevs'. As he drove by His Excellency's door, he thought of
stopping, but at once told the driver to go straight on. He made up his
mind to try and find out whether anything had happened at the office,
and if he were not there to go to His Excellency, ostensibly to report
on Vasya. Some one must be informed of it.

As soon as he got into the waiting-room he was surrounded by
fellow-clerks, for the most part young men of his own standing in the
service. With one voice they began asking him what had happened to
Vasya? At the same time they all told him that Vasya had gone out of his
mind, and thought that he was to be sent for a soldier as a punishment
for having neglected his work. Arkady Ivanovitch, answering them in all
directions, or rather avoiding giving a direct answer to any one, rushed
into the inner room. On the way he learned that Vasya was in Yulian
Mastakovitch's private room, that every one had been there and that
Esper Ivanovitch had gone in there too. He was stopped on the way. One
of the senior clerks asked him who he was and what he wanted? Without
distinguishing the person he said something about Vasya and went
straight into the room. He heard Yulian Mastakovitch's voice from
within. "Where are you going?" some one asked him at the very door.
Arkady Ivanovitch was almost in despair; he was on the point of turning
back, but through the open door he saw his poor Vasya. He pushed the
door and squeezed his way into the room. Every one seemed to be in
confusion and perplexity, because Yulian Mastakovitch was apparently
much chagrined. All the more important personages were standing about
him talking, and coming to no decision. At a little distance stood
Vasya. Arkady's heart sank when he looked at him. Vasya was standing,
pale, with his head up, stiffly erect, like a recruit before a new
officer, with his feet together and his hands held rigidly at his sides.
He was looking Yulian Mastakovitch straight in the face. Arkady was
noticed at once, and some one who knew that they lodged together
mentioned the fact to His Excellency. Arkady was led up to him. He tried
to make some answer to the questions put to him, glanced at Yulian
Mastakovitch and seeing on his face a look of genuine compassion, began
trembling and sobbing like a child. He even did more, he snatched His
Excellency's hand and held it to his eyes, wetting it with his tears, so
that Yulian Mastakovitch was obliged to draw it hastily away, and waving
it in the air, said, "Come, my dear fellow, come! I see you have a good
heart." Arkady sobbed and turned an imploring look on every one. It
seemed to him that they were all brothers of his dear Vasya, that they
were all worried and weeping about him. "How, how has it happened? how
has it happened?" asked Yulian Mastakovitch. "What has sent him out of
his mind?"

"Gra--gra--gratitude!" was all Arkady Ivanovitch could articulate.

Every one heard his answer with amazement, and it seemed strange and
incredible to every one that a man could go out of his mind from
gratitude. Arkady explained as best he could.

"Good Heavens! what a pity!" said Yulian Mastakovitch at last. "And the
work entrusted to him was not important, and not urgent in the least. It
was not worth while for a man to kill himself over it! Well, take him
away!"... At this point Yulian Mastakovitch turned to Arkady Ivanovitch
again, and began questioning him once more. "He begs," he said, pointing
to Vasya, "that some girl should not be told of this. Who is she--his
betrothed, I suppose?"

Arkady began to explain. Meanwhile Vasya seemed to be thinking of
something, as though he were straining his memory to the utmost to
recall some important, necessary matter, which was particularly wanted
at this moment. From time to time he looked round with a distressed
face, as though hoping some one would remind him of what he had
forgotten. He fastened his eyes on Arkady. All of a sudden there was a
gleam of hope in his eyes; he moved with the left leg forward, took
three steps as smartly as he could, clicking with his right boot as
soldiers do when they move forward at the call from their officer. Every
one was waiting to see what would happen.

"I have a physical defect and am small and weak, and I am not fit for
military service, Your Excellency," he said abruptly.

At that every one in the room felt a pang at his heart, and firm as was
Yulian Mastakovitch's character, tears trickled from his eyes.

"Take him away," he said, with a wave of his hands.

"Present!" said Vasya in an undertone; he wheeled round to the left and
marched out of the room. All who were interested in his fate followed
him out. Arkady pushed his way out behind the others. They made Vasya
sit down in the waiting-room till the carriage came which had been
ordered to take him to the hospital. He sat down in silence and seemed
in great anxiety. He nodded to any one he recognized as though saying
good-bye. He looked round towards the door every minute, and prepared
himself to set off when he should be told it was time. People crowded in
a close circle round him; they were all shaking their heads and
lamenting. Many of them were much impressed by his story, which had
suddenly become known. Some discussed his illness, while others
expressed their pity and high opinion of Vasya, saying that he was such
a quiet, modest young man, that he had been so promising; people
described what efforts he had made to learn, how eager he was for
knowledge, how he had worked to educate himself. "He had risen by his
own efforts from a humble position," some one observed. They spoke with
emotion of His Excellency's affection for him. Some of them fell to
explaining why Vasya was possessed by the idea that he was being sent
for a soldier, because he had not finished his work. They said that the
poor fellow had so lately belonged to the class liable for military
service and had only received his first grade through the good offices
of Yulian Mastakovitch, who had had the cleverness to discover his
talent, his docility, and the rare mildness of his disposition. In fact,
there was a great number of views and theories.

A very short fellow-clerk of Vasya's was conspicuous as being
particularly distressed. He was not very young, probably about thirty.
He was pale as a sheet, trembling all over and smiling queerly, perhaps
because any scandalous affair or terrible scene both frightens, and at
the same time somewhat rejoices the outside spectator. He kept running
round the circle that surrounded Vasya, and as he was so short, stood on
tiptoe and caught at the button of every one--that is, of those with
whom he felt entitled to take such a liberty--and kept saying that he
knew how it had all happened, that it was not so simple, but a very
important matter, that it couldn't be left without further inquiry; then
stood on tiptoe again, whispered in some one's ear, nodded his head
again two or three times, and ran round again. At last everything was
over. The porter made his appearance, and an attendant from the hospital
went up to Vasya and told him it was time to start. Vasya jumped up in a
flutter and went with them, looking about him. He was looking about for
some one.

"Vasya, Vasya!" cried Arkady Ivanovitch, sobbing. Vasya stopped, and
Arkady squeezed his way up to him. They flung themselves into each
other's arms in a last bitter embrace. It was sad to see them. What
monstrous calamity was wringing the tears from their eyes! What were
they weeping for? What was their trouble? Why did they not understand
one another?

"Here, here, take it! Take care of it," said Shumkov, thrusting a paper
of some kind into Arkady's hand. "They will take it away from me. Bring
it me later on; bring it ... take care of it...." Vasya could not
finish, they called to him. He ran hurriedly downstairs, nodding to
every one, saying good-bye to every one. There was despair in his face.
At last he was put in the carriage and taken away. Arkady made haste to
open the paper: it was Liza's curl of black hair, from which Vasya had
never parted. Hot tears gushed from Arkady's eyes: oh, poor Liza!

When office hours were over, he went to the Artemyevs'. There is no need
to describe what happened there! Even Petya, little Petya, though he
could not quite understand what had happened to dear Vasya, went into a
corner, hid his face in his little hands, and sobbed in the fullness of
his childish heart. It was quite dusk when Arkady returned home. When he
reached the Neva he stood still for a minute and turned a keen glance up
the river into the smoky frozen thickness of the distance, which was
suddenly flushed crimson with the last purple and blood-red glow of
sunset, still smouldering on the misty horizon.... Night lay over the
city, and the wide plain of the Neva, swollen with frozen snow, was
shining in the last gleams of the sun with myriads of sparks of gleaming
hoar frost. There was a frost of twenty degrees. A cloud of frozen steam
hung about the overdriven horses and the hurrying people. The condensed
atmosphere quivered at the slightest sound, and from all the roofs on
both sides of the river, columns of smoke rose up like giants and
floated across the cold sky, intertwining and untwining as they went, so
that it seemed new buildings were rising up above the old, a new town
was taking shape in the air.... It seemed as if all that world, with all
its inhabitants, strong and weak, with all their habitations, the
refuges of the poor, or the gilded palaces for the comfort of the
powerful of this world was at that twilight hour like a fantastic vision
of fairy-land, like a dream which in its turn would vanish and pass away
like vapour into the dark blue sky. A strange thought came to poor
Vasya's forlorn friend. He started, and his heart seemed at that instant
flooded with a hot rush of blood kindled by a powerful, overwhelming
sensation he had never known before. He seemed only now to understand
all the trouble, and to know why his poor Vasya had gone out of his
mind, unable to bear his happiness. His lips twitched, his eyes lighted
up, he turned pale, and as it were had a clear vision into something
new.

He became gloomy and depressed, and lost all his gaiety. His old lodging
grew hateful to him--he took a new room. He did not care to visit the
Artemyevs, and indeed he could not. Two years later he met Lizanka in
church. She was by then married; beside her walked a wet nurse with a
tiny baby. They greeted each other, and for a long time avoided all
mention of the past. Liza said that, thank God, she was happy, that she
was not badly off, that her husband was a kind man and that she was fond
of him.... But suddenly in the middle of a sentence her eyes filled with
tears, her voice failed, she turned away, and bowed down to the church
pavement to hide her grief.




A CHRISTMAS TREE AND A WEDDING

A STORY


The other day I saw a wedding ... but no, I had better tell you about
the Christmas tree. The wedding was nice, I liked it very much; but the
other incident was better. I don't know how it was that, looking at that
wedding, I thought of that Christmas tree. This was what happened. Just
five years ago, on New Year's Eve, I was invited to a children's party.
The giver of the party was a well-known and business-like personage,
with connections, with a large circle of acquaintances, and a good many
schemes on hand, so that it may be supposed that this party was an
excuse for getting the parents together and discussing various
interesting matters in an innocent, casual way. I was an outsider; I had
no interesting matter to contribute, and so I spent the evening rather
independently. There was another gentleman present who was, I fancied,
of no special rank or family, and who, like me, had simply turned up at
this family festivity. He was the first to catch my eye. He was a tall,
lanky man, very grave and very correctly dressed. But one could see that
he was in no mood for merrymaking and family festivity; whenever he
withdrew into a corner he left off smiling and knitted his bushy black
brows. He had not a single acquaintance in the party except his host.
One could see that he was fearfully bored, but that he was valiantly
keeping up the part of a man perfectly happy and enjoying himself. I
learned afterwards that this was a gentleman from the provinces, who had
a critical and perplexing piece of business in Petersburg, who had
brought a letter of introduction to our host, for whom our host was, by
no means _con amore_, using his interest, and whom he had invited, out
of civility, to his children's party. He did not play cards, cigars were
not offered him, every one avoided entering into conversation with him,
most likely recognizing the bird from its feathers; and so my gentleman
was forced to sit the whole evening stroking his whiskers simply to have
something to do with his hands. His whiskers were certainly very fine.
But he stroked them so zealously that, looking at him, one might have
supposed that the whiskers were created first and the gentleman only
attached to them in order to stroke them.

In addition to this individual who assisted in this way at our host's
family festivity (he had five fat, well-fed boys), I was attracted, too,
by another gentleman. But he was quite of a different sort. He was a
personage. He was called Yulian Mastakovitch. From the first glance one
could see that he was an honoured guest, and stood in the same relation
to our host as our host stood in relation to the gentleman who was
stroking his whiskers. Our host and hostess said no end of polite things
to him, waited on him hand and foot, pressed him to drink, flattered
him, brought their visitors up to be introduced to him, but did not take
him to be introduced to any one else. I noticed that tears glistened in
our host's eyes when he remarked about the party that he had rarely
spent an evening so agreeably. I felt as it were frightened in the
presence of such a personage, and so, after admiring the children, I
went away into a little parlour, which was quite empty, and sat down in
an arbour of flowers which filled up almost half the room.

The children were all incredibly sweet, and resolutely refused to model
themselves on the "grown-ups," regardless of all the admonitions of
their governesses and mammas. They stripped the Christmas tree to the
last sweetmeat in the twinkling of an eye, and had succeeded in breaking
half the playthings before they knew what was destined for which.
Particularly charming was a black-eyed, curly-headed boy, who kept
trying to shoot me with his wooden gun. But my attention was still more
attracted by his sister, a girl of eleven, quiet, dreamy, pale, with
big, prominent, dreamy eyes, exquisite as a little Cupid. The children
hurt her feelings in some way, and so she came away from them to the
same empty parlour in which I was sitting, and played with her doll in
the corner. The visitors respectfully pointed out her father, a wealthy
contractor, and some one whispered that three hundred thousand roubles
were already set aside for her dowry. I turned round to glance at the
group who were interested in such a circumstance, and my eye fell on
Yulian Mastakovitch, who, with his hands behind his back and his head on
one side, was listening with the greatest attention to these gentlemen's
idle gossip. Afterwards I could not help admiring the discrimination of
the host and hostess in the distribution of the children's presents. The
little girl, who had already a portion of three hundred thousand
roubles, received the costliest doll. Then followed presents diminishing
in value in accordance with the rank of the parents of these happy
children; finally, the child of lowest degree, a thin, freckled,
red-haired little boy of ten, got nothing but a book of stories about
the marvels of nature and tears of devotion, etc., without pictures or
even woodcuts. He was the son of a poor widow, the governess of the
children of the house, an oppressed and scared little boy. He was
dressed in a short jacket of inferior nankin. After receiving his book
he walked round the other toys for a long time; he longed to play with
the other children, but did not dare; it was evident that he already
felt and understood his position. I love watching children. Their first
independent approaches to life are extremely interesting. I noticed that
the red-haired boy was so fascinated by the costly toys of the other
children, especially by a theatre in which he certainly longed to take
some part, that he made up his mind to sacrifice his dignity. He smiled
and began playing with the other children, he gave away his apple to a
fat-faced little boy who had a mass of goodies tied up in a
pocket-handkerchief already, and even brought himself to carry another
boy on his back, simply not to be turned away from the theatre, but an
insolent youth gave him a heavy thump a minute later. The child did not
dare to cry. Then the governess, his mother, made her appearance, and
told him not to interfere with the other children's playing. The boy
went away to the same room in which was the little girl. She let him
join her, and the two set to work very eagerly dressing the expensive
doll.

I had been sitting more than half an hour in the ivy arbour, listening
to the little prattle of the red-haired boy and the beauty with the
dowry of three hundred thousand, who was nursing her doll, when Yulian
Mastakovitch suddenly walked into the room. He had taken advantage of
the general commotion following a quarrel among the children to step out
of the drawing-room. I had noticed him a moment before talking very
cordially to the future heiress's papa, whose acquaintance he had just
made, of the superiority of one branch of the service over another. Now
he stood in hesitation and seemed to be reckoning something on his
fingers.

"Three hundred ... three hundred," he was whispering. "Eleven ... twelve
... thirteen," and so on. "Sixteen--five years! Supposing it is at four
per cent.--five times twelve is sixty; yes, to that sixty ... well, in
five years we may assume it will be four hundred. Yes!... But he won't
stick to four per cent., the rascal. He can get eight or ten. Well, five
hundred, let us say, five hundred at least ... that's certain; well, say
a little more for frills. H'm!..."

His hesitation was at an end, he blew his nose and was on the point of
going out of the room when he suddenly glanced at the little girl and
stopped short. He did not see me behind the pots of greenery. It seemed
to me that he was greatly excited. Either his calculations had affected
his imagination or something else, for he rubbed his hands and could
hardly stand still. This excitement reached its utmost limit when he
stopped and bent another resolute glance at the future heiress. He was
about to move forward, but first looked round, then moving on tiptoe, as
though he felt guilty, he advanced towards the children. He approached
with a little smile, bent down and kissed her on the head. The child,
not expecting this attack, uttered a cry of alarm.

"What are you doing here, sweet child?" he asked in a whisper, looking
round and patting the girl's cheek.

"We are playing."

"Ah! With him?" Yulian Mastakovitch looked askance at the boy. "You had
better go into the drawing-room, my dear," he said to him.

The boy looked at him open-eyed and did not utter a word. Yulian
Mastakovitch looked round him again, and again bent down to the little
girl.

"And what is this you've got--a dolly, dear child?" he asked.

"Yes, a dolly," answered the child, frowning, and a little shy.

"A dolly ... and do you know, dear child, what your dolly is made of?"

"I don't know ..." the child answered in a whisper, hanging her head.

"It's made of rags, darling. You had better go into the drawing-room to
your playmates, boy," said Yulian Mastakovitch, looking sternly at the
boy. The boy and girl frowned and clutched at each other. They did not
want to be separated.

"And do you know why they gave you that doll?" asked Yulian
Mastakovitch, dropping his voice to a softer and softer tone.

"I don't know."

"Because you have been a sweet and well-behaved child all the week."

At this point Yulian Mastakovitch, more excited than ever, speaking in
most dulcet tones, asked at last, in a hardly audible voice choked with
emotion and impatience--

"And will you love me, dear little girl, when I come and see your papa
and mamma?"

Saying this, Yulian Mastakovitch tried once more to kiss "the dear
little girl," but the red-haired boy, seeing that the little girl was on
the point of tears, clutched her hand and began whimpering from sympathy
for her. Yulian Mastakovitch was angry in earnest.

"Go away, go away from here, go away!" he said to the boy. "Go into the
drawing-room! Go in there to your playmates!"

"No, he needn't, he needn't! You go away," said the little girl. "Leave
him alone, leave him alone," she said, almost crying.

Some one made a sound at the door. Yulian Mastakovitch instantly raised
his majestic person and took alarm. But the red-haired boy was even more
alarmed than Yulian Mastakovitch; he abandoned the little girl and,
slinking along by the wall, stole out of the parlour into the
dining-room. To avoid arousing suspicion, Yulian Mastakovitch, too, went
into the dining-room. He was as red as a lobster, and, glancing into the
looking-glass, seemed to be ashamed at himself. He was perhaps vexed
with himself for his impetuosity and hastiness. Possibly, he was at
first so much impressed by his calculations, so inspired and fascinated
by them, that in spite of his seriousness and dignity he made up his
mind to behave like a boy, and directly approach the object of his
attentions, even though she could not be really the object of his
attentions for another five years at least. I followed the estimable
gentleman into the dining-room and there beheld a strange spectacle.
Yulian Mastakovitch, flushed with vexation and anger, was frightening
the red-haired boy, who, retreating from him, did not know where to run
in his terror.

"Go away; what are you doing here? Go away, you scamp; are you after the
fruit here, eh? Get along, you naughty boy! Get along, you sniveller, to
your playmates!"

The panic-stricken boy in his desperation tried creeping under the
table. Then his persecutor, in a fury, took out his large batiste
handkerchief and began flicking it under the table at the child, who
kept perfectly quiet. It must be observed that Yulian Mastakovitch was a
little inclined to be fat. He was a sleek, red-faced, solidly built man,
paunchy, with thick legs; what is called a fine figure of a man, round
as a nut. He was perspiring, breathless, and fearfully flushed. At last
he was almost rigid, so great was his indignation and perhaps--who
knows?--his jealousy. I burst into loud laughter. Yulian Mastakovitch
turned round and, in spite of all his consequence, was overcome with
confusion. At that moment from the opposite door our host came in. The
boy crept out from under the table and wiped his elbows and his knees.
Yulian Mastakovitch hastened to put to his nose the handkerchief which
he was holding in his hand by one end.

Our host looked at the three of us in some perplexity; but as a man who
knew something of life, and looked at it from a serious point of view,
he at once availed himself of the chance of catching his visitor by
himself.

"Here, this is the boy," he said, pointing to the red-haired boy, "for
whom I had the honour to solicit your influence."

"Ah!" said Yulian Mastakovitch, who had hardly quite recovered himself.

"The son of my children's governess," said our host, in a tone of a
petitioner, "a poor woman, the widow of an honest civil servant; and
therefore ... and therefore, Yulian Mastakovitch, if it were possible
..."

"Oh, no, no!" Yulian Mastakovitch made haste to answer; "no, excuse me,
Filip Alexyevitch, it's quite impossible. I've made inquiries; there's
no vacancy, and if there were, there are twenty applicants who have far
more claim than he.... I am very sorry, very sorry...."

"What a pity," said our host. "He is a quiet, well-behaved boy."

"A great rascal, as I notice," answered Yulian Mastakovitch, with a
nervous twist of his lip. "Get along, boy; why are you standing there?
Go to your playmates," he said, addressing the child.

At that point he could not contain himself, and glanced at me out of one
eye. I, too, could not contain myself, and laughed straight in his face.
Yulian Mastakovitch turned away at once, and in a voice calculated to
reach my ear, asked who was that strange young man? They whispered
together and walked out of the room. I saw Yulian Mastakovitch
afterwards shaking his head incredulously as our host talked to him.

After laughing to my heart's content I returned to the drawing-room.
There the great man, surrounded by fathers and mothers of families,
including the host and hostess, was saying something very warmly to a
lady to whom he had just been introduced. The lady was holding by the
hand the little girl with whom Yulian Mastakovitch had had the scene in
the parlour a little while before. Now he was launching into praises and
raptures over the beauty, the talents, the grace and the charming
manners of the charming child. He was unmistakably making up to the
mamma. The mother listened to him almost with tears of delight. The
father's lips were smiling. Our host was delighted at the general
satisfaction. All the guests, in fact, were sympathetically gratified;
even the children's games were checked that they might not hinder the
conversation: the whole atmosphere was saturated with reverence. I heard
afterwards the mamma of the interesting child, deeply touched, beg
Yulian Mastakovitch, in carefully chosen phrases, to do her the special
honour of bestowing upon them the precious gift of his acquaintance, and
heard with what unaffected delight Yulian Mastakovitch accepted the
invitation, and how afterwards the guests, dispersing in different
directions, moving away with the greatest propriety, poured out to one
another the most touchingly flattering comments upon the contractor, his
wife, his little girl, and, above all, upon Yulian Mastakovitch.

"Is that gentleman married?" I asked, almost aloud, of one of my
acquaintances, who was standing nearest to Yulian Mastakovitch. Yulian
Mastakovitch flung a searching and vindictive glance at me.

"No!" answered my acquaintance, chagrined to the bottom of his heart by
the awkwardness of which I had intentionally been guilty....

       *     *     *     *     *

I passed lately by a certain church; I was struck by the crowd of people
in carriages. I heard people talking of the wedding. It was a cloudy
day, it was beginning to sleet. I made my way through the crowd at the
door and saw the bridegroom. He was a sleek, well-fed, round, paunchy
man, very gorgeously dressed up. He was running fussily about, giving
orders. At last the news passed through the crowd that the bride was
coming. I squeezed my way through the crowd and saw a marvellous beauty,
who could scarcely have reached her first season. But the beauty was
pale and melancholy. She looked preoccupied; I even fancied that her
eyes were red with recent weeping. The classic severity of every feature
of her face gave a certain dignity and seriousness to her beauty. But
through that sternness and dignity, through that melancholy, could be
seen the look of childish innocence; something indescribably naïve,
fluid, youthful, which seemed mutely begging for mercy.

People were saying that she was only just sixteen. Glancing attentively
at the bridegroom, I suddenly recognized him as Yulian Mastakovitch,
whom I had not seen for five years. I looked at her. My God! I began to
squeeze my way as quickly as I could out of the church. I heard people
saying in the crowd that the bride was an heiress, that she had a dowry
of five hundred thousand ... and a trousseau worth ever so much.

"It was a good stroke of business, though!" I thought as I made my way
into the street.




POLZUNKOV

A STORY


I began to scrutinize the man closely. Even in his exterior there was
something so peculiar that it compelled one, however far away one's
thoughts might be, to fix one's eyes upon him and go off into the most
irrepressible roar of laughter. That is what happened to me. I must
observe that the little man's eyes were so mobile, or perhaps he was so
sensitive to the magnetism of every eye fixed upon him, that he almost
by instinct guessed that he was being observed, turned at once to the
observer and anxiously analysed his expression. His continual mobility,
his turning and twisting, made him look strikingly like a dancing doll.
It was strange! He seemed afraid of jeers, in spite of the fact that he
was almost getting his living by being a buffoon for all the world, and
exposed himself to every buffet in a moral sense and even in a physical
one, judging from the company he was in. Voluntary buffoons are not even
to be pitied. But I noticed at once that this strange creature, this
ridiculous man, was by no means a buffoon by profession. There was still
something gentlemanly in him. His very uneasiness, his continual
apprehensiveness about himself, were actually a testimony in his favour.
It seemed to me that his desire to be obliging was due more to kindness
of heart than to mercenary considerations. He readily allowed them to
laugh their loudest at him and in the most unseemly way, to his face,
but at the same time--and I am ready to take my oath on it--his heart
ached and was sore at the thought that his listeners were so caddishly
brutal as to be capable of laughing, not at anything said or done, but
at him, at his whole being, at his heart, at his head, at his
appearance, at his whole body, flesh and blood. I am convinced that he
felt at that moment all the foolishness of his position; but the protest
died away in his heart at once, though it invariably sprang up again in
the most heroic way. I am convinced that all this was due to nothing
else but a kind heart, and not to fear of the inconvenience of being
kicked out and being unable to borrow money from some one. This
gentleman was for ever borrowing money, that is, he asked for alms in
that form, when after playing the fool and entertaining them at his
expense he felt in a certain sense entitled to borrow money from them.
But, good heavens! what a business the borrowing was! And with what a
countenance he asked for the loan! I could not have imagined that on
such a small space as the wrinkled, angular face of that little man room
could be found, at one and the same time, for so many different
grimaces, for such strange, variously characteristic shades of feeling,
such absolutely killing expressions. Everything was there--shame and an
assumption of insolence, and vexation at the sudden flushing of his
face, and anger and fear of failure, and entreaty to be forgiven for
having dared to pester, and a sense of his own dignity, and a still
greater sense of his own abjectness--all this passed over his face like
lightning. For six whole years he had struggled along in God's world in
this way, and so far had been unable to take up a fitting attitude at
the interesting moment of borrowing money! I need not say that he never
could grow callous and completely abject. His heart was too sensitive,
too passionate! I will say more, indeed: in my opinion, he was one of
the most honest and honourable men in the world, but with a little
weakness: of being ready to do anything abject at any one's bidding,
good-naturedly and disinterestedly, simply to oblige a fellow-creature.
In short, he was what is called "a rag" in the fullest sense of the
word. The most absurd thing was, that he was dressed like any one else,
neither worse nor better, tidily, even with a certain elaborateness, and
actually had pretentions to respectability and personal dignity. This
external equality and internal inequality, his uneasiness about himself
and at the same time his continual self-depreciation--all this was
strikingly incongruous and provocative of laughter and pity. If he had
been convinced in his heart (and in spite of his experience it did
happen to him at moments to believe this) that his audience were the
most good-natured people in the world, who were simply laughing at
something amusing, and not at the sacrifice of his personal dignity, he
would most readily have taken off his coat, put it on wrong side
outwards, and have walked about the streets in that attire for the
diversion of others and his own gratification. But equality he could
never anyhow attain. Another trait: the queer fellow was proud, and
even, by fits and starts, when it was not too risky, generous. It was
worth seeing and hearing how he could sometimes, not sparing himself,
consequently with pluck, almost with heroism, dispose of one of his
patrons who had infuriated him to madness. But that was at moments....
In short, he was a martyr in the fullest sense of the word, but the most
useless and consequently the most comic martyr.

There was a general discussion going on among the guests. All at once I
saw our queer friend jump upon his chair, and call out at the top of his
voice, anxious for the exclusive attention of the company.

"Listen," the master of the house whispered to me. "He sometimes tells
the most curious stories.... Does he interest you?"

I nodded and squeezed myself into the group. The sight of a well-dressed
gentleman jumping upon his chair and shouting at the top of his voice
did, in fact, draw the attention of all. Many who did not know the queer
fellow looked at one another in perplexity, the others roared with
laughter.

"I knew Fedosey Nikolaitch. I ought to know Fedosey Nikolaitch better
than any one!" cried the queer fellow from his elevation. "Gentlemen,
allow me to tell you something. I can tell you a good story about
Fedosey Nikolaitch! I know a story--exquisite!"

"Tell it, Osip Mihalitch, tell it."

"Tell it."

"Listen."

"Listen, listen."

"I begin; but, gentlemen, this is a peculiar story...."

"Very good, very good."

"It's a comic story."

"Very good, excellent, splendid. Get on!"

"It is an episode in the private life of your humble...."

"But why do you trouble yourself to announce that it's comic?"

"And even somewhat tragic!"

"Eh???!"

"In short, the story which it will afford you all pleasure to hear me
now relate, gentlemen--the story, in consequence of which I have come
into company so interesting and profitable...."

"No puns!"

"This story."

"In short the story--make haste and finish the introduction. The story,
which has its value," a fair-haired young man with moustaches pronounced
in a husky voice, dropping his hand into his coat pocket and, as though
by chance, pulling out a purse instead of his handkerchief.

"The story, my dear sirs, after which I should like to see many of you
in my place. And, finally, the story, in consequence of which I have not
married."

"Married! A wife! Polzunkov tried to get married!!"

"I confess I should like to see Madame Polzunkov."

"Allow me to inquire the name of the would-be Madame Polzunkov," piped a
youth, making his way up to the storyteller.

"And so for the first chapter, gentlemen. It was just six years ago, in
spring, the thirty-first of March--note the date, gentlemen--on the
eve...."

"Of the first of April!" cried a young man with ringlets.

"You are extraordinarily quick at guessing. It was evening. Twilight was
gathering over the district town of N., the moon was about to float out
... everything in proper style, in fact. And so in the very late
twilight I, too, floated out of my poor lodging on the sly--after taking
leave of my restricted granny, now dead. Excuse me, gentlemen, for
making use of such a fashionable expression, which I heard for the last
time from Nikolay Nikolaitch. But my granny was indeed restricted: she
was blind, dumb, deaf, stupid--everything you please.... I confess I was
in a tremor, I was prepared for great deeds; my heart was beating like a
kitten's when some bony hand clutches it by the scruff of the neck."

"Excuse me, Monsieur Polzunkov."

"What do you want?"

"Tell it more simply; don't over-exert yourself, please!"

"All right," said Osip Mihalitch, a little taken aback. "I went into the
house of Fedosey Nikolaitch (the house that he had bought). Fedosey
Nikolaitch, as you know, is not a mere colleague, but the full-blown
head of a department. I was announced, and was at once shown into the
study. I can see it now; the room was dark, almost dark, but candles
were not brought. Behold, Fedosey Nikolaitch walks in. There he and I
were left in the darkness...."

"Whatever happened to you?" asked an officer.

"What do you suppose?" asked Polzunkov, turning promptly, with a
convulsively working face, to the young man with ringlets. "Well,
gentlemen, a strange circumstance occurred, though indeed there was
nothing strange in it: it was what is called an everyday affair--I
simply took out of my pocket a roll of paper ... and he a roll of
paper."

"Paper notes?"

"Paper notes; and we exchanged."

"I don't mind betting that there's a flavour of bribery about it,"
observed a respectably dressed, closely cropped young gentleman.

"Bribery!" Polzunkov caught him up.

          "'Oh, may I be a Liberal,
            Such as many I have seen!'

If you, too, when it is your lot to serve in the provinces, do not warm
your hands at your country's hearth.... For as an author said: 'Even the
smoke of our native land is sweet to us.' She is our Mother, gentlemen,
our Mother Russia; we are her babes, and so we suck her!"

There was a roar of laughter.

"Only would you believe it, gentlemen, I have never taken bribes?" said
Polzunkov, looking round at the whole company distrustfully.

A prolonged burst of Homeric laughter drowned Polzunkov's words in
guffaws.

"It really is so, gentlemen...."

But here he stopped, still looking round at every one with a strange
expression of face; perhaps--who knows?--at that moment the thought came
into his mind that he was more honest than many of all that honourable
company.... Anyway, the serious expression of his face did not pass away
till the general merriment was quite over.

"And so," Polzunkov began again when all was still, "though I never did
take bribes, yet that time I transgressed; I put in my pocket a bribe
... from a bribe-taker ... that is, there were certain papers in my
hands which, if I had cared to send to a certain person, it would have
gone ill with Fedosey Nikolaitch."

"So then he bought them from you?"

"He did."

"Did he give much?"

"He gave as much as many a man nowadays would sell his conscience for
complete, with all its variations ... if only he could get anything for
it. But I felt as though I were scalded when I put the money in my
pocket. I really don't understand what always comes over me,
gentlemen--but I was more dead than alive, my lips twitched and my legs
trembled; well, I was to blame, to blame, entirely to blame. I was
utterly conscience-stricken; I was ready to beg Fedosey Nikolaitch's
forgiveness."

"Well, what did he do--did he forgive you?"

"But I didn't ask his forgiveness.... I only mean that that is how I
felt. Then I have a sensitive heart, you know. I saw he was looking me
straight in the face. 'Have you no fear of God, Osip Mihailitch?' said
he. Well, what could I do? From a feeling of propriety I put my head on
one side and I flung up my hands. 'In what way,' said I, 'have I no fear
of God, Fedosey Nikolaitch?' But I just said that from a feeling of
propriety.... I was ready to sink into the earth. 'After being so long a
friend of our family, after being, I may say, like a son--and who knows
what Heaven had in store for us, Osip Mihailitch?--and all of a sudden
to inform against me--to think of that now!... What am I to think of
mankind after that, Osip Mihailitch?' Yes, gentlemen, he did read me a
lecture! 'Come,' he said, 'you tell me what I am to think of mankind
after that, Osip Mihailitch.' 'What is he to think?' I thought; and do
you know, there was a lump in my throat, and my voice was quivering, and
knowing my hateful weakness, I snatched up my hat. 'Where are you off
to, Osip Mihailitch? Surely on the eve of such a day you cannot bear
malice against me? What wrong have I done you?...' 'Fedosey Nikolaitch,'
I said, 'Fedosey Nikolaitch....' In fact, I melted, gentlemen, I melted
like a sugar-stick. And the roll of notes that was lying in my pocket,
that, too, seemed screaming out: 'You ungrateful brigand, you accursed
thief!' It seemed to weigh a hundredweight ... (if only it had weighed a
hundredweight!).... 'I see,' says Fedosey Nikolaitch, 'I see your
penitence ... you know to-morrow....' 'St. Mary of Egypt's day....'
'Well, don't weep,' said Fedosey Nikolaitch, 'that's enough: you've
erred, and you are penitent! Come along! Maybe I may succeed in bringing
you back again into the true path,' says he ... 'maybe, my modest
Penates' (yes,'Penates,' I remember he used that expression, the rascal)
'will warm,' says he, 'your harden ... I will not say hardened, but
erring heart....' He took me by the arm, gentlemen, and led me to his
family circle. A cold shiver ran down my back; I shuddered! I thought
with what eyes shall I present myself--you must know, gentlemen ... eh,
what shall I say?--a delicate position had arisen here."

"Not Madame Polzunkov?"

"Marya Fedosyevna, only she was not destined, you know, to bear the name
you have given her; she did not attain that honour. Fedosey Nikolaitch
was right, you see, when he said that I was almost looked upon as a son
in the house; it had been so, indeed, six months before, when a certain
retired junker called Mihailo Maximitch Dvigailov, was still living. But
by God's will he died, and he put off settling his affairs till death
settled his business for him."

"Ough!"

"Well, never mind, gentlemen, forgive me, it was a slip of the tongue.
It's a bad pun, but it doesn't matter it's being bad--what happened was
far worse, when I was left, so to say, with nothing in prospect but a
bullet through the brain, for that junker, though he would not admit me
into his house (he lived in grand style, for he had always known how to
feather his nest), yet perhaps correctly he believed me to be his son."

"Aha!"

"Yes, that was how it was! So they began to cold-shoulder me at Fedosey
Nikolaitch's. I noticed things, I kept quiet; but all at once, unluckily
for me (or perhaps luckily!), a cavalry officer galloped into our little
town like snow on our head. His business--buying horses for the
army--was light and active, in cavalry style, but he settled himself
solidly at Fedosey Nikolaitch's, as though he were laying siege to it! I
approached the subject in a roundabout way, as my nasty habit is; I said
one thing and another, asking him what I had done to be treated so,
saying that I was almost like a son to him, and when might I expect him
to behave more like a father.... Well, he began answering me. And when
he begins to speak you are in for a regular epic in twelve cantos, and
all you can do is to listen, lick your lips and throw up your hands in
delight. And not a ha'p'orth of sense, at least there's no making out
the sense. You stand puzzled like a fool--he puts you in a fog, he
twists about like an eel and wriggles away from you. It's a special
gift, a real gift--it's enough to frighten people even if it is no
concern of theirs. I tried one thing and another, and went hither and
thither. I took the lady songs and presented her with sweets and thought
of witty things to say to her. I tried sighing and groaning. 'My heart
aches,' I said, 'it aches from love.' And I went in for tears and secret
explanations. Man is foolish, you know.... I never reminded myself that
I was thirty ... not a bit of it! I tried all my arts. It was no go. It
was a failure, and I gained nothing but jeers and gibes. I was
indignant, I was choking with anger. I slunk off and would not set foot
in the house. I thought and thought and made up my mind to denounce him.
Well, of course, it was a shabby thing--I meant to give away a friend, I
confess. I had heaps of material and splendid material--a grand case. It
brought me fifteen hundred roubles when I changed it and my report on it
for bank notes!"

"Ah, so that was the bribe!"

"Yes, sir, that was the bribe--and it was a bribe-taker who had to pay
it--and I didn't do wrong, I can assure you! Well, now I will go on: he
drew me, if you will kindly remember, more dead than alive into the room
where they were having tea. They all met me, seeming as it were
offended, that is, not exactly offended, but hurt--so hurt that it was
simply.... They seemed shattered, absolutely shattered, and at the same
time there was a look of becoming dignity on their faces, a gravity in
their expression, something fatherly, parental ... the prodigal son had
come back to them--that's what it had come to! They made me sit down to
tea, but there was no need to do that: I felt as though a samovar was
toiling in my bosom and my feet were like ice. I was humbled, I was
cowed. Marya Fominishna, his wife, addressed me familiarly from the
first word.

"'How is it you have grown so thin, my boy?'

"'I've not been very well, Marya Fominishna,' I said. My wretched voice
shook.

"And then quite suddenly--she must have been waiting for a chance to get
a dig at me, the old snake--she said--

"'I suppose your conscience felt ill at ease, Osip Mihalitch, my dear!
Our fatherly hospitality was a reproach to you! You have been punished
for the tears I have shed.'

"Yes, upon my word, she really said that--she had the conscience to say
it. Why, that was nothing to her, she was a terror! She did nothing but
sit there and pour out tea. But if you were in the market, my darling, I
thought you'd shout louder than any fishwife there.... That's the kind
of woman she was. And then, to my undoing, the daughter, Marya
Fedosyevna, came in, in all her innocence, a little pale and her eyes
red as though she had been weeping. I was bowled over on the spot like a
fool. But it turned out afterwards that the tears were a tribute to the
cavalry officer. He had made tracks for home and taken his hook for good
and all; for you know it was high time for him to be off--I may as well
mention the fact here; not that his leave was up precisely, but you
see.... It was only later that the loving parents grasped the position
and had found out all that had happened.... What could they do? They
hushed their trouble up--an addition to the family!

"Well, I could not help it--as soon as I looked at her I was done for; I
stole a glance at my hat, I wanted to get up and make off. But there was
no chance of that, they took away my hat.... I must confess, I did think
of getting off without it. 'Well!' I thought--but no, they latched the
doors. There followed friendly jokes, winking, little airs and graces. I
was overcome with embarrassment, said something stupid, talked nonsense,
about love. My charmer sat down to the piano and with an air of wounded
feeling sang the song about the hussar who leaned upon the sword--that
finished me off!

"'Well,' said Fedosey Nikolaitch, 'all is forgotten, come to my arms!'

"I fell just as I was, with my face on his waistcoat.

"'My benefactor! You are a father to me!' said I. And I shed floods of
hot tears. Lord, have mercy on us, what a to-do there was! He cried, his
good lady cried, Mashenka cried ... there was a flaxen-headed creature
there, she cried too.... That wasn't enough: the younger children crept
out of all the corners (the Lord had filled their quiver full) and they
howled too.... Such tears, such emotion, such joy! They found their
prodigal, it was like a soldier's return to his home. Then followed
refreshments, we played forfeits, and 'I have a pain'--'Where is
it?'--'In my heart'--'Who gave it you?' My charmer blushed. The old man
and I had some punch--they won me over and did for me completely.

"I returned to my grandmother with my head in a whirl. I was laughing
all the way home; for full two hours I paced up and down our little
room. I waked up my old granny and told her of my happiness.

"'But did he give you any money, the brigand?'

"'He did, granny, he did, my dear--luck has come to us all of a heap:
we've only to open our hand and take it.'

"I waked up Sofron.

"'Sofron,' I said, 'take off my boots.'

"Sofron pulled off my boots.

"'Come, Sofron, congratulate me now, give me a kiss! I am going to get
married, my lad, I am going to get married. You can get jolly drunk
to-morrow, you can have a spree, my dear soul--your master is getting
married.'

"My heart was full of jokes and laughter. I was beginning to drop off to
sleep, but something made me get up again. I sat in thought: to-morrow
is the first of April, a bright and playful day--what should I do? And I
thought of something. Why, gentlemen, I got out of bed, lighted a
candle, and sat down to the writing-table just as I was. I was in a
fever of excitement, quite carried away--you know, gentlemen, what it is
when a man is quite carried away? I wallowed joyfully in the mud, my
dear friends. You see what I am like; they take something from you, and
you give them something else as well and say, 'Take that, too.' They
strike you on the cheek and in your joy you offer them your whole back.
Then they try to lure you like a dog with a bun, and you embrace them
with your foolish paws and fall to kissing them with all your heart and
soul. Why, see what I am doing now, gentlemen! You are laughing and
whispering--I see it! After I have told you all my story you will begin
to turn me into ridicule, you will begin to attack me, but yet I go on
talking and talking and talking! And who tells me to? Who drives me to
do it? Who is standing behind my back whispering to me, 'Speak, speak
and tell them'? And yet I do talk, I go on telling you, I try to please
you as though you were my brothers, all my dearest friends.... Ech!"

The laughter which had sprung up by degrees on all sides completely
drowned at last the voice of the speaker, who really seemed worked up
into a sort of ecstasy. He paused, for several minutes his eyes strayed
about the company, then suddenly, as though carried away by a whirlwind,
he waved his hand, burst out laughing himself, as though he really found
his position amusing, and fell to telling his story again.

"I scarcely slept all night, gentlemen. I was scribbling all night: you
see, I thought of a trick. Ech, gentlemen, the very thought of it makes
me ashamed. It wouldn't have been so bad if it all had been done at
night--I might have been drunk, blundered, been silly and talked
nonsense--but not a bit of it! I woke up in the morning as soon as it
was light, I hadn't slept more than an hour or two, and was in the same
mind. I dressed, I washed, I curled and pomaded my hair, put on my new
dress coat and went straight off to spend the holiday with Fedosey
Nikolaitch, and I kept the joke I had written in my hat. He met me again
with open arms, and invited me again to his fatherly waistcoat. But I
assumed an air of dignity. I had the joke I thought of the night before
in my mind. I drew a step back.

"'No, Fedosey Nikolaitch, but will you please read this letter,' and I
gave it him together with my daily report. And do you know what was in
it? Why, 'for such and such reasons the aforesaid Osip Mihalitch asks to
be discharged,' and under my petition I signed my full rank! Just think
what a notion! Good Lord, it was the cleverest thing I could think of!
As to-day was the first of April, I was pretending, for the sake of a
joke, that my resentment was not over, that I had changed my mind in the
night and was grumpy, and more offended than ever, as though to say, 'My
dear benefactor, I don't want to know you nor your daughter either. I
put the money in my pocket yesterday, so I am secure--so here's my
petition for a transfer to be discharged. I don't care to serve under
such a chief as Fedosey Nikolaitch. I want to go into a different office
and then, maybe, I'll inform.' I pretended to be a regular scoundrel, I
wanted to frighten them. And a nice way of frightening them, wasn't it?
A pretty thing, gentlemen, wasn't it? You see, my heart had grown tender
towards them since the day before, so I thought I would have a little
joke at the family--I would tease the fatherly heart of Fedosey
Nikolaitch.

"As soon as he took my letter and opened it, I saw his whole countenance
change.

"'What's the meaning of this, Osip Mihalitch?'

"And like a little fool I said--

"'The first of April! Many happy returns of the day, Fedosey
Nikolaitch!' just like a silly school-boy who hides behind his
grandmother's arm-chair and then shouts 'oof' into her ear suddenly at
the top of his voice, meaning to frighten her. Yes ... yes, I feel quite
ashamed to talk about it, gentlemen! No, I won't tell you."

"Nonsense! What happened then?"

"Nonsense, nonsense! Tell us! Yes, do," rose on all sides.

"There was an outcry and a hullabaloo, my dear friends! Such
exclamations of surprise! And 'you mischievous fellow, you naughty man,'
and what a fright I had given them--and all so sweet that I felt ashamed
and wondered how such a holy place could be profaned by a sinner like
me.

"'Well, my dear boy,' piped the mamma, 'you gave me such a fright that
my legs are all of a tremble still, I can hardly stand on my feet! I ran
to Masha as though I were crazy: "Mashenka," I said, "what will become
of us! See how _your_ friend has turned out!" and I was unjust to you,
my dear boy. You must forgive an old woman like me, I was taken in!
Well, I thought, when he got home last night, he got home late, he began
thinking and perhaps he fancied that we sent for him on purpose,
yesterday, that we wanted to get hold of him. I turned cold at the
thought! Give over, Mashenka, don't go on winking at me--Osip Mihalitch
isn't a stranger! I am your mother, I am not likely to say any harm!
Thank God, I am not twenty, but turned forty-five.'

"Well, gentlemen, I almost flopped at her feet on the spot. Again there
were tears, again there were kisses. Jokes began. Fedosey Nikolaitch,
too, thought he would make April fools of us. He told us the fiery bird
had flown up with a letter in her diamond beak! He tried to take us in,
too--didn't we laugh? weren't we touched? Foo! I feel ashamed to talk
about it.

"Well, my good friends, the end is not far off now. One day
passed, two, three, a week; I was regularly engaged to her. I should
think so! The wedding rings were ordered, the day was fixed, only they
did not want to make it public for a time--they wanted to wait for the
Inspector's visit to be over. I was all impatience for the Inspector's
arrival--my happiness depended upon him. I was in a hurry to get his
visit over. And in the excitement and rejoicing Fedosey Nikolaitch threw
all the work upon me: writing up the accounts, making up the reports,
checking the books, balancing the totals. I found things in terrible
disorder--everything had been neglected, there were muddles and
irregularities everywhere. Well, I thought, I must do my best for my
father-in-law! And he was ailing all the time, he was taken ill, it
appears; he seemed to get worse day by day. And, indeed, I grew as thin
as a rake myself, I was afraid I would break down. However, I finished
the work grandly. I got things straight for him in time.

"Suddenly they sent a messenger for me. I ran headlong--what could it
be? I saw my Fedosey Nikolaitch, his head bandaged up in a vinegar
compress, frowning, sighing, and moaning.

"'My dear boy, my son,' he said, 'if I die, to whom shall I leave you,
my darlings?'

"His wife trailed in with all his children; Mashenka was in tears and I
blubbered, too.

"'Oh no,' he said. 'God will be merciful, He will not visit my
transgressions on you.'

"Then he dismissed them all, told me to shut the door after them, and we
were left alone, _tête-à-tête_.

"'I have a favour to ask of you.'

"'What favour?'

"'Well, my dear boy, there is no rest for me even on my deathbed. I am
in want.'

"'How so?' I positively flushed crimson, I could hardly speak.

"'Why, I had to pay some of my own money into the Treasury. I grudge
nothing for the public weal, my boy! I don't grudge my life. Don't you
imagine any ill. I am sad to think that slanderers have blackened my
name to you.... You were mistaken, my hair has gone white from grief.
The Inspector is coming down upon us and Matveyev is seven thousand
roubles short, and I shall have to answer for it.... Who else? It will
be visited upon me, my boy: where were my eyes? And how can we get it
from Matveyev? He has had trouble enough already: why should I bring the
poor fellow to ruin?'

"'Holy saints!' I thought, 'what a just man! What a heart!'

"'And I don't want to take my daughter's money, which has been set aside
for her dowry: that sum is sacred. I have money of my own, it's true,
but I have lent it all to friends--how is one to collect it all in a
minute?'

"I simply fell on my knees before him. 'My benefactor!' I cried, 'I've
wronged you, I have injured you; it was slanderers who wrote against
you; don't break my heart, take back your money!'

"He looked at me and there were tears in his eyes. 'That was just what I
expected from you, my son. Get up! I forgave you at the time for the
sake of my daughter's tears--now my heart forgives you freely! You have
healed my wounds. I bless you for all time!'

"Well, when he blessed me, gentlemen, I scurried home as soon as I
could. I got the money:

"'Here, father, here's the money. I've only spent fifty roubles.'

"'Well, that's all right,' he said. 'But now every trifle may count; the
time is short, write a report dated some days ago that you were short of
money and had taken fifty roubles on account. I'll tell the authorities
you had it in advance.'

"Well, gentlemen, what do you think? I did write that report, too!"

"Well, what then? What happened? How did it end?"

"As soon as I had written the report, gentlemen, this is how it ended.
The next day, in the early morning, an envelope with a government seal
arrived. I looked at it and what had I got? The sack! That is,
instructions to hand over my work, to deliver the accounts--and to go
about my business!"

"How so?"

"That's just what I cried at the top of my voice, 'How so?' Gentlemen,
there was a ringing in my ears. I thought there was no special reason
for it--but no, the Inspector had arrived in the town. My heart sank.
'It's not for nothing,' I thought. And just as I was I rushed off to
Fedosey Nikolaitch.

"'How is this?' I said.

"'What do you mean?' he said.

"'Why, I am dismissed.'

"'Dismissed? how?'

"'Why, look at this!'

"'Well, what of it?'

"'Why, but I didn't ask for it!'

"'Yes, you did--you sent in your papers on the first of--April.' (I had
never taken that letter back!)

"'Fedosey Nikolaitch! I can't believe my ears, I can't believe my eyes!
Is this you?'

"'It is me, why?'

"'My God!'

"'I am sorry, sir. I am very sorry that you made up your mind to retire
from the service so early. A young man ought to be in the service, and
you've begun to be a little light-headed of late. And as for your
character, set your mind at rest: I'll see to that! Your behaviour has
always been so exemplary!'

"'But that was a little joke, Fedosey Nikolaitch! I didn't mean it, I
just gave you the letter for your fatherly ... that's all.'

"'That's all? A queer joke, sir! Does one jest with documents like that?
Why, you are sometimes sent to Siberia for such jokes. Now, good-bye. I
am busy. We have the Inspector here--the duties of the service before
everything; you can kick up your heels, but we have to sit here at work.
But I'll get you a character---- Oh, another thing: I've just bought a
house from Matveyev. We are moving in in a day or two. So I expect I
shall not have the pleasure of seeing you at our new residence. _Bon
voyage!_'

"I ran home.

"'We are lost, granny!'

"She wailed, poor dear, and then I saw the page from Fedosey
Nikolaitch's running up with a note and a bird-cage, and in the cage
there was a starling. In the fullness of my heart I had given her the
starling. And in the note there were the words: 'April 1st,' and nothing
more. What do you think of that, gentlemen?"

"What happened then? What happened then?"

"What then! I met Fedosey Nikolaitch once, I meant to tell him to his
face he was a scoundrel."

"Well?"

"But somehow I couldn't bring myself to it, gentlemen."




A LITTLE HERO

A STORY


At that time I was nearly eleven, I had been sent in July to spend the
holiday in a village near Moscow with a relation of mine called T.,
whose house was full of guests, fifty, or perhaps more.... I don't
remember, I didn't count. The house was full of noise and gaiety. It
seemed as though it were a continual holiday, which would never end. It
seemed as though our host had taken a vow to squander all his vast
fortune as rapidly as possible, and he did indeed succeed, not long ago,
in justifying this surmise, that is, in making a clean sweep of it all
to the last stick.

Fresh visitors used to drive up every minute. Moscow was close by, in
sight, so that those who drove away only made room for others, and the
everlasting holiday went on its course. Festivities succeeded one
another, and there was no end in sight to the entertainments. There were
riding parties about the environs; excursions to the forest or the
river; picnics, dinners in the open air; suppers on the great terrace of
the house, bordered with three rows of gorgeous flowers that flooded
with their fragrance the fresh night air, and illuminated the brilliant
lights which made our ladies, who were almost every one of them pretty
at all times, seem still more charming, with their faces excited by the
impressions of the day, with their sparkling eyes, with their
interchange of spritely conversation, their peals of ringing laughter;
dancing, music, singing; if the sky were overcast tableaux vivants,
charades, proverbs were arranged, private theatricals were got up. There
were good talkers, story-tellers, wits.

Certain persons were prominent in the foreground. Of course backbiting
and slander ran their course, as without them the world could not get
on, and millions of persons would perish of boredom, like flies. But as
I was at that time eleven I was absorbed by very different interests,
and either failed to observe these people, or if I noticed anything, did
not see it all. It was only afterwards that some things came back to my
mind. My childish eyes could only see the brilliant side of the picture,
and the general animation, splendour, and bustle--all that, seen and
heard for the first time, made such an impression upon me that for the
first few days, I was completely bewildered and my little head was in a
whirl.

I keep speaking of my age, and of course I was a child, nothing more
than a child. Many of these lovely ladies petted me without dreaming of
considering my age. But strange to say, a sensation which I did not
myself understand already had possession of me; something was already
whispering in my heart, of which till then it had had no knowledge, no
conception, and for some reason it began all at once to burn and throb,
and often my face glowed with a sudden flush. At times I felt as it were
abashed, and even resentful of the various privileges of my childish
years. At other times a sort of wonder overwhelmed me, and I would go
off into some corner where I could sit unseen, as though to take breath
and remember something--something which it seemed to me I had remembered
perfectly till then, and now had suddenly forgotten, something without
which I could not show myself anywhere, and could not exist at all.

At last it seemed to me as though I were hiding something from every
one. But nothing would have induced me to speak of it to any one,
because, small boy that I was, I was ready to weep with shame. Soon in
the midst of the vortex around me I was conscious of a certain
loneliness. There were other children, but all were either much older or
younger than I; besides, I was in no mood for them. Of course nothing
would have happened to me if I had not been in an exceptional position.
In the eyes of those charming ladies I was still the little unformed
creature whom they at once liked to pet, and with whom they could play
as though he were a little doll. One of them particularly, a
fascinating, fair woman, with very thick luxuriant hair, such as I had
never seen before and probably shall never see again, seemed to have
taken a vow never to leave me in peace. I was confused, while she was
amused by the laughter which she continually provoked from all around us
by her wild, giddy pranks with me, and this apparently gave her immense
enjoyment. At school among her schoolfellows she was probably nicknamed
the Tease. She was wonderfully good-looking, and there was something in
her beauty which drew one's eyes from the first moment. And certainly
she had nothing in common with the ordinary modest little fair girls,
white as down and soft as white mice, or pastors' daughters. She was not
very tall, and was rather plump, but had soft, delicate, exquisitely cut
features. There was something quick as lightning in her face, and indeed
she was like fire all over, light, swift, alive. Her big open eyes
seemed to flash sparks; they glittered like diamonds, and I would never
exchange such blue sparkling eyes for any black ones, were they blacker
than any Andalusian orb. And, indeed, my blonde was fully a match for
the famous brunette whose praises were sung by a great and well-known
poet, who, in a superb poem, vowed by all Castille that he was ready to
break his bones to be permitted only to touch the mantle of his divinity
with the tip of his finger. Add to that, that _my_ charmer was the
merriest in the world, the wildest giggler, playful as a child, although
she had been married for the last five years. There was a continual
laugh upon her lips, fresh as the morning rose that, with the first ray
of sunshine, opens its fragrant crimson bud with the cool dewdrops still
hanging heavy upon it.

I remember that the day after my arrival private theatricals were being
got up. The drawing-room was, as they say, packed to overflowing; there
was not a seat empty, and as I was somehow late I had to enjoy the
performance standing. But the amusing play attracted me to move
forwarder and forwarder, and unconsciously I made my way to the first
row, where I stood at last leaning my elbows on the back of an armchair,
in which a lady was sitting. It was my blonde divinity, but we had not
yet made acquaintance. And I gazed, as it happened, at her marvellous,
fascinating shoulders, plump and white as milk, though it did not matter
to me in the least whether I stared at a woman's exquisite shoulders or
at the cap with flaming ribbons that covered the grey locks of a
venerable lady in the front row. Near my blonde divinity sat a spinster
lady not in her first youth, one of those who, as I chanced to observe
later, always take refuge in the immediate neighbourhood of young and
pretty women, selecting such as are not fond of cold-shouldering young
men. But that is not the point, only this lady, noting my fixed gaze,
bent down to her neighbour and with a simper whispered something in her
ear. The blonde lady turned at once, and I remember that her glowing
eyes so flashed upon me in the half dark, that, not prepared to meet
them, I started as though I were scalded. The beauty smiled.

"Do you like what they are acting?" she asked, looking into my face with
a shy and mocking expression.

"Yes," I answered, still gazing at her with a sort of wonder that
evidently pleased her.

"But why are you standing? You'll get tired. Can't you find a seat?"

"That's just it, I can't," I answered, more occupied with my grievance
than with the beauty's sparkling eyes, and rejoicing in earnest at
having found a kind heart to whom I could confide my troubles. "I have
looked everywhere, but all the chairs are taken," I added, as though
complaining to her that all the chairs were taken.

"Come here," she said briskly, quick to act on every decision, and,
indeed, on every mad idea that flashed on her giddy brain, "come here,
and sit on my knee."

"On your knee," I repeated, taken aback. I have mentioned already that I
had begun to resent the privileges of childhood and to be ashamed of
them in earnest. This lady, as though in derision, had gone ever so much
further than the others. Moreover, I had always been a shy and bashful
boy, and of late had begun to be particularly shy with women.

"Why yes, on my knee. Why don't you want to sit on my knee?" she
persisted, beginning to laugh more and more, so that at last she was
simply giggling, goodness knows at what, perhaps at her freak, or
perhaps at my confusion. But that was just what she wanted.

I flushed, and in my confusion looked round trying to find where to
escape; but seeing my intention she managed to catch hold of my hand to
prevent me from going away, and pulling it towards her, suddenly, quite
unexpectedly, to my intense astonishment, squeezed it in her mischievous
warm fingers, and began to pinch my fingers till they hurt so much that
I had to do my very utmost not to cry out, and in my effort to control
myself made the most absurd grimaces. I was, besides, moved to the
greatest amazement, perplexity, and even horror, at the discovery that
there were ladies so absurd and spiteful as to talk nonsense to boys,
and even pinch their fingers, for no earthly reason and before
everybody. Probably my unhappy face reflected my bewilderment, for the
mischievous creature laughed in my face, as though she were crazy, and
meantime she was pinching my fingers more and more vigorously. She was
highly delighted in playing such a mischievous prank and completely
mystifying and embarrassing a poor boy. My position was desperate. In
the first place I was hot with shame, because almost every one near had
turned round to look at us, some in wonder, others with laughter,
grasping at once that the beauty was up to some mischief. I dreadfully
wanted to scream, too, for she was wringing my fingers with positive
fury just because I didn't scream; while I, like a Spartan, made up my
mind to endure the agony, afraid by crying out of causing a general
fuss, which was more than I could face. In utter despair I began at last
struggling with her, trying with all my might to pull away my hand, but
my persecutor was much stronger than I was. At last I could bear it no
longer, and uttered a shriek--that was all she was waiting for!
Instantly she let me go, and turned away as though nothing had happened,
as though it was not she who had played the trick but some one else,
exactly like some schoolboy who, as soon as the master's back is turned,
plays some trick on some one near him, pinches some small weak boy,
gives him a flip, a kick, or a nudge with his elbows, and instantly
turns again, buries himself in his book and begins repeating his lesson,
and so makes a fool of the infuriated teacher who flies down like a hawk
at the noise.

But luckily for me the general attention was distracted at the moment by
the masterly acting of our host, who was playing the chief part in the
performance, some comedy of Scribe's. Every one began to applaud; under
cover of the noise I stole away and hurried to the furthest end of the
room, from which, concealed behind a column, I looked with horror
towards the place where the treacherous beauty was sitting. She was
still laughing, holding her handkerchief to her lips. And for a long
time she was continually turning round, looking for me in every
direction, probably regretting that our silly tussle was so soon over,
and hatching some other trick to play on me.

That was the beginning of our acquaintance, and from that evening she
would never let me alone. She persecuted me without consideration or
conscience, she became my tyrant and tormentor. The whole absurdity of
her jokes with me lay in the fact that she pretended to be head over
ears in love with me, and teased me before every one. Of course for a
wild creature as I was all this was so tiresome and vexatious that it
almost reduced me to tears, and I was sometimes put in such a difficult
position that I was on the point of fighting with my treacherous
admirer. My naïve confusion, my desperate distress, seemed to egg her on
to persecute me more; she knew no mercy, while I did not know how to get
away from her. The laughter which always accompanied us, and which she
knew so well how to excite, roused her to fresh pranks. But at last
people began to think that she went a little too far in her jests. And,
indeed, as I remember now, she did take outrageous liberties with a
child such as I was.

But that was her character; she was a spoilt child in every respect. I
heard afterwards that her husband, a very short, very fat, and very
red-faced man, very rich and apparently very much occupied with
business, spoilt her more than any one. Always busy and flying round, he
could not stay two hours in one place. Every day he drove into Moscow,
sometimes twice in the day, and always, as he declared himself, on
business. It would be hard to find a livelier and more good-natured face
than his facetious but always well-bred countenance. He not only loved
his wife to the point of weakness, softness: he simply worshipped her
like an idol.

He did not restrain her in anything. She had masses of friends, male and
female. In the first place, almost everybody liked her; and secondly,
the feather-headed creature was not herself over particular in the
choice of her friends, though there was a much more serious foundation
to her character than might be supposed from what I have just said about
her. But of all her friends she liked best of all one young lady, a
distant relation, who was also of our party now. There existed between
them a tender and subtle affection, one of those attachments which
sometimes spring up at the meeting of two dispositions often the very
opposite of each other, of which one is deeper, purer and more austere,
while the other, with lofty humility, and generous self-criticism,
lovingly gives way to the other, conscious of the friend's superiority
and cherishing the friendship as a happiness. Then begins that tender
and noble subtlety in the relations of such characters, love and
infinite indulgence on the one side, on the other love and respect--a
respect approaching awe, approaching anxiety as to the impression made
on the friend so highly prized, and an eager, jealous desire to get
closer and closer to that friend's heart in every step in life.

These two friends were of the same age, but there was an immense
difference between them in everything--in looks, to begin with. Madame
M. was also very handsome, but there was something special in her beauty
that strikingly distinguished her from the crowd of pretty women; there
was something in her face that at once drew the affection of all to her,
or rather, which aroused a generous and lofty feeling of kindliness in
every one who met her. There are such happy faces. At her side everyone
grew as it were better, freer, more cordial; and yet her big mournful
eyes, full of fire and vigour, had a timid and anxious look, as though
every minute dreading something antagonistic and menacing, and this
strange timidity at times cast so mournful a shade over her mild, gentle
features which recalled the serene faces of Italian Madonnas, that
looking at her one soon became oneself sad, as though for some trouble
of one's own. The pale, thin face, in which, through the irreproachable
beauty of the pure, regular lines and the mournful severity of some mute
hidden grief, there often flitted the clear looks of early childhood,
telling of trustful years and perhaps simple-hearted happiness in the
recent past, the gentle but diffident, hesitating smile, all aroused
such unaccountable sympathy for her that every heart was unconsciously
stirred with a sweet and warm anxiety that powerfully interceded on her
behalf even at a distance, and made even strangers feel akin to her. But
the lovely creature seemed silent and reserved, though no one could have
been more attentive and loving if any one needed sympathy. There are
women who are like sisters of mercy in life. Nothing can be hidden from
them, nothing, at least, that is a sore or wound of the heart. Any one
who is suffering may go boldly and hopefully to them without fear of
being a burden, for few men know the infinite patience of love,
compassion and forgiveness that may be found in some women's hearts.
Perfect treasures of sympathy, consolation and hope are laid up in these
pure hearts, so often full of suffering of their own--for a heart which
loves much grieves much--though their wounds are carefully hidden from
the curious eye, for deep sadness is most often mute and concealed. They
are not dismayed by the depth of the wound, nor by its foulness and its
stench; any one who comes to them is deserving of help; they are, as it
were, born for heroism.... Mme. M. was tall, supple and graceful, but
rather thin. All her movements seemed somehow irregular, at times slow,
smooth, and even dignified, at times childishly hasty; and yet, at the
same time, there was a sort of timid humility in her gestures, something
tremulous and defenceless, though it neither desired nor asked for
protection.

I have mentioned already that the outrageous teasing of the treacherous
fair lady abashed me, flabbergasted me, and wounded me to the quick. But
there was for that another secret, strange and foolish reason, which I
concealed, at which I shuddered as at a skeleton. At the very thought of
it, brooding, utterly alone and overwhelmed, in some dark mysterious
corner to which the inquisitorial mocking eye of the blue-eyed rogue
could not penetrate, I almost gasped with confusion, shame and fear--in
short, I was in love; that perhaps is nonsense, that could hardly have
been. But why was it, of all the faces surrounding me, only her face
caught my attention? Why was it that it was only she whom I cared to
follow with my eyes, though I certainly had no inclination in those days
to watch ladies and seek their acquaintance? This happened most
frequently on the evenings when we were all kept indoors by bad weather,
and when, lonely, hiding in some corner of the big drawing-room, I
stared about me aimlessly, unable to find anything to do, for except my
teasing ladies, few people ever addressed me, and I was insufferably
bored on such evenings. Then I stared at the people round me, listened
to the conversation, of which I often did not understand one word, and
at that time the mild eyes, the gentle smile and lovely face of Mme. M.
(for she was the object of my passion) for some reason caught my
fascinated attention; and the strange vague, but unutterably sweet
impression remained with me. Often for hours together I could not tear
myself away from her; I studied every gesture, every movement she made,
listened to every vibration of her rich, silvery, but rather muffled
voice; but strange to say, as the result of all my observations, I felt,
mixed with a sweet and timid impression, a feeling of intense curiosity.
It seemed as though I were on the verge of some mystery.

Nothing distressed me so much as being mocked at in the presence of Mme.
M. This mockery and humorous persecution, as I thought, humiliated me.
And when there was a general burst of laughter at my expense, in which
Mme. M. sometimes could not help joining, in despair, beside myself with
misery, I used to tear myself from my tormentor and run away upstairs,
where I remained in solitude the rest of the day, not daring to show my
face in the drawing-room. I did not yet, however, understand my shame
nor my agitation; the whole process went on in me unconsciously. I had
hardly said two words to Mme. M., and indeed I should not have dared to.
But one evening after an unbearable day I turned back from an expedition
with the rest of the company. I was horribly tired and made my way home
across the garden. On a seat in a secluded avenue I saw Mme. M. She was
sitting quite alone, as though she had purposely chosen this solitary
spot, her head was drooping and she was mechanically twisting her
handkerchief. She was so lost in thought that she did not hear me till I
reached her.

Noticing me, she got up quickly from her seat, turned round, and I saw
her hurriedly wipe her eyes with her handkerchief. She was crying.
Drying her eyes, she smiled to me and walked back with me to the house.
I don't remember what we talked about; but she frequently sent me off on
one pretext or another, to pick a flower, or to see who was riding in
the next avenue. And when I walked away from her, she at once put her
handkerchief to her eyes again and wiped away rebellious tears, which
would persist in rising again and again from her heart and dropping from
her poor eyes. I realized that I was very much in her way when she sent
me off so often, and, indeed, she saw herself that I noticed it all, but
yet could not control herself, and that made my heart ache more and more
for her. I raged at myself at that moment and was almost in despair;
cursed myself for my awkwardness and lack of resource, and at the same
time did not know how to leave her tactfully, without betraying that I
had noticed her distress, but walked beside her in mournful
bewilderment, almost in alarm, utterly at a loss and unable to find a
single word to keep up our scanty conversation.

This meeting made such an impression on me that I stealthily watched
Mme. M. the whole evening with eager curiosity, and never took my eyes
off her. But it happened that she twice caught me unawares watching her,
and on the second occasion, noticing me, she gave me a smile. It was the
only time she smiled that evening. The look of sadness had not left her
face, which was now very pale. She spent the whole evening talking to an
ill-natured and quarrelsome old lady, whom nobody liked owing to her
spying and backbiting habits, but of whom every one was afraid, and
consequently every one felt obliged to be polite to her....

At ten o'clock Mme. M.'s husband arrived. Till that moment I watched her
very attentively, never taking my eyes off her mournful face; now at the
unexpected entrance of her husband I saw her start, and her pale face
turned suddenly as white as a handkerchief. It was so noticeable that
other people observed it. I overheard a fragmentary conversation from
which I guessed that Mme. M. was not quite happy; they said her husband
was as jealous as an Arab, not from love, but from vanity. He was before
all things a European, a modern man, who sampled the newest ideas and
prided himself upon them. In appearance he was a tall, dark-haired,
particularly thick-set man, with European whiskers, with a
self-satisfied, red face, with teeth white as sugar, and with an
irreproachably gentlemanly deportment. He was called a _clever man_.
Such is the name given in certain circles to a peculiar species of
mankind which grows fat at other people's expense, which does absolutely
nothing and has no desire to do anything, and whose heart has turned
into a lump of fat from everlasting slothfulness and idleness. You
continually hear from such men that there is nothing they can do owing
to certain very complicated and hostile circumstances, which "thwart
their genius," and that it was "sad to see the waste of their talents."
This is a fine phrase of theirs, their _mot d'ordre_, their watchword, a
phrase which these well-fed, fat friends of ours bring out at every
minute, so that it has long ago bored us as an arrant Tartuffism, an
empty form of words. Some, however, of these amusing creatures, who
cannot succeed in finding anything to do--though, indeed, they never
seek it--try to make every one believe that they have not a lump of fat
for a heart, but on the contrary, something _very deep_, though what
precisely the greatest surgeon would hardly venture to decide--from
civility, of course. These gentlemen make their way in the world through
the fact that all their instincts are bent in the direction of coarse
sneering, short-sighted censure and immense conceit. Since they have
nothing else to do but note and emphasize the mistakes and weaknesses of
others, and as they have precisely as much good feeling as an oyster, it
is not difficult for them with such powers of self-preservation to get
on with people fairly successfully. They pride themselves extremely upon
that. They are, for instance, as good as persuaded that almost the whole
world owes them something; that it is theirs, like an oyster which they
keep in reserve; that all are fools except themselves; that every one is
like an orange or a sponge, which they will squeeze as soon as they want
the juice; that they are the masters everywhere, and that all this
acceptable state of affairs is solely due to the fact that they are
people of so much intellect and character. In their measureless conceit
they do not admit any defects in themselves, they are like that species
of practical rogues, innate Tartuffes and Falstaffs, who are such
thorough rogues that at last they have come to believe that that is as
it should be, that is, that they should spend their lives in
knavishness; they have so often assured every one that they are honest
men, that they have come to believe that they are honest men, and that
their roguery is honesty. They are never capable of inner judgment
before their conscience, of generous self-criticism; for some things
they are too fat. Their own priceless personality, their Baal and
Moloch, their magnificent _ego_ is always in their foreground
everywhere. All nature, the whole world for them is no more than a
splendid mirror created for the little god to admire himself continually
in it, and to see no one and nothing behind himself; so it is not
strange that he sees everything in the world in such a hideous light. He
has a phrase in readiness for everything and--the acme of ingenuity on
his part--the most fashionable phrase. It is just these people, indeed,
who help to make the fashion, proclaiming at every cross-road an idea in
which they scent success. A fine nose is just what they have for
sniffing a fashionable phrase and making it their own before other
people get hold of it, so that it seems to have originated with them.
They have a particular store of phrases for proclaiming their profound
sympathy for humanity, for defining what is the most correct and
rational form of philanthropy, and continually attacking romanticism, in
other words, everything fine and true, each atom of which is more
precious than all their mollusc tribe. But they are too coarse to
recognize the truth in an indirect, roundabout and unfinished form, and
they reject everything that is immature, still fermenting and unstable.
The well-nourished man has spent all his life in merry-making, with
everything provided, has done nothing himself and does not know how hard
every sort of work is, and so woe betide you if you jar upon his fat
feelings by any sort of roughness; he'll never forgive you for that, he
will always remember it and will gladly avenge it. The long and short of
it is, that my hero is neither more nor less than a gigantic, incredibly
swollen bag, full of sentences, fashionable phrases, and labels of all
sorts and kinds.

M. M., however, had a speciality and was a very remarkable man; he was a
wit, good talker and story-teller, and there was always a circle round
him in every drawing-room. That evening he was particularly successful
in making an impression. He took possession of the conversation; he was
in his best form, gay, pleased at something, and he compelled the
attention of all; but Mme. M. looked all the time as though she were
ill; her face was so sad that I fancied every minute that tears would
begin quivering on her long eyelashes. All this, as I have said,
impressed me extremely and made me wonder. I went away with a feeling of
strange curiosity, and dreamed all night of M. M., though till then I
had rarely had dreams.

Next day, early in the morning, I was summoned to a rehearsal of some
tableaux vivants in which I had to take part. The tableaux vivants,
theatricals, and afterwards a dance were all fixed for the same evening,
five days later--the birthday of our host's younger daughter. To this
entertainment, which was almost improvised, another hundred guests were
invited from Moscow and from surrounding villas, so that there was a
great deal of fuss, bustle and commotion. The rehearsal, or rather
review of the costumes, was fixed so early in the morning because our
manager, a well-known artist, a friend of our host's, who had consented
through affection for him to undertake the arrangement of the tableaux
and the training of us for them, was in haste now to get to Moscow to
purchase properties and to make final preparations for the fête, as
there was no time to lose. I took part in one tableau with Mme. M. It
was a scene from mediæval life and was called "The Lady of the Castle
and Her Page."

I felt unutterably confused on meeting Mme. M. at the rehearsal. I kept
feeling that she would at once read in my eyes all the reflections, the
doubts, the surmises, that had arisen in my mind since the previous day.
I fancied, too, that I was, as it were, to blame in regard to her, for
having come upon her tears the day before and hindered her grieving, so
that she could hardly help looking at me askance, as an unpleasant
witness and unforgiven sharer of her secret. But, thank goodness, it
went off without any great trouble; I was simply not noticed. I think
she had no thoughts to spare for me or for the rehearsal; she was
absent-minded, sad and gloomily thoughtful; it was evident that she was
worried by some great anxiety. As soon as my part was over I ran away to
change my clothes, and ten minutes later came out on the verandah into
the garden. Almost at the same time Mme. M. came out by another door,
and immediately afterwards coming towards us appeared her self-satisfied
husband, who was returning from the garden, after just escorting into it
quite a crowd of ladies and there handing them over to a competent
_cavaliere servente_. The meeting of the husband and wife was evidently
unexpected. Mme. M., I don't know why, grew suddenly confused, and a
faint trace of vexation was betrayed in her impatient movement. The
husband, who had been carelessly whistling an air and with an air of
profundity stroking his whiskers, now, on meeting his wife, frowned and
scrutinized her, as I remember now, with a markedly inquisitorial stare.

"You are going into the garden?" he asked, noticing the parasol and book
in her hand.

"No, into the copse," she said, with a slight flush.

"Alone?"

"With him," said Mme. M., pointing to me. "I always go a walk alone in
the morning," she added, speaking in an uncertain, hesitating voice, as
people do when they tell their first lie.

"H'm ... and I have just taken the whole party there. They have all met
there together in the flower arbour to see N. off. He is going away, you
know.... Something has gone wrong in Odessa. Your cousin" (he meant the
fair beauty) "is laughing and crying at the same time; there is no
making her out. She says, though, that you are angry with N. about
something and so wouldn't go and see him off. Nonsense, of course?"

"She's laughing," said Mme. M., coming down the verandah steps.

"So this is your daily _cavaliere servente_," added M. M., with a wry
smile, turning his lorgnette upon me.

"Page!" I cried, angered by the lorgnette and the jeer; and laughing
straight in his face I jumped down the three steps of the verandah at
one bound.

"A pleasant walk," muttered M. M., and went on his way.

Of course, I immediately joined Mme. M. as soon as she indicated me to
her husband, and looked as though she had invited me to do so an hour
before, and as though I had been accompanying her on her walks every
morning for the last month. But I could not make out why she was so
confused, so embarrassed, and what was in her mind when she brought
herself to have recourse to her little lie? Why had she not simply said
that she was going alone? I did not know how to look at her, but
overwhelmed with wonder I began by degrees very naïvely peeping into her
face; but just as an hour before at the rehearsal she did not notice
either my looks or my mute question. The same anxiety, only more intense
and more distinct, was apparent in her face, in her agitation, in her
walk. She was in haste, and walked more and more quickly and kept
looking uneasily down every avenue, down every path in the wood that led
in the direction of the garden. And I, too, was expecting something.
Suddenly there was the sound of horses' hoofs behind us. It was the
whole party of ladies and gentlemen on horseback escorting N., the
gentleman who was so suddenly deserting us.

Among the ladies was my fair tormentor, of whom M. M. had told us that
she was in tears. But characteristically she was laughing like a child,
and was galloping briskly on a splendid bay horse. On reaching us N.
took off his hat, but did not stop, nor say one word to Mme. M. Soon all
the cavalcade disappeared from our sight. I glanced at Mme. M. and
almost cried out in wonder; she was standing as white as a handkerchief
and big tears were gushing from her eyes. By chance our eyes met: Mme.
M. suddenly flushed and turned away for an instant, and a distinct look
of uneasiness and vexation flitted across her face. I was in the way,
worse even than last time, that was clearer than day, but how was I to
get away?

And, as though guessing my difficulty, Mme. M. opened the book which she
had in her hand, and colouring and evidently trying not to look at me
she said, as though she had only suddenly realized it--

"Ah! It is the second part. I've made a mistake; please bring me the
first."

I could not but understand. My part was over, and I could not have been
more directly dismissed.

I ran off with her book and did not come back. The first part lay
undisturbed on the table that morning....

But I was not myself; in my heart there was a sort of haunting terror. I
did my utmost not to meet Mme. M. But I looked with wild curiosity at
the self-satisfied person of M. M., as though there must be something
special about him now. I don't understand what was the meaning of my
absurd curiosity. I only remember that I was strangely perplexed by all
that I had chanced to see that morning. But the day was only just
beginning and it was fruitful in events for me.

Dinner was very early that day. An expedition to a neighbouring hamlet
to see a village festival that was taking place there had been fixed for
the evening, and so it was necessary to be in time to get ready. I had
been dreaming for the last three days of this excursion, anticipating
all sorts of delights. Almost all the company gathered together on the
verandah for coffee. I cautiously followed the others and concealed
myself behind the third row of chairs. I was attracted by curiosity, and
yet I was very anxious not to be seen by Mme. M. But as luck would have
it I was not far from my fair tormentor. Something miraculous and
incredible was happening to her that day; she looked twice as handsome.
I don't know how and why this happens, but such miracles are by no means
rare with women. There was with us at this moment a new guest, a tall,
pale-faced young man, the official admirer of our fair beauty, who had
just arrived from Moscow as though on purpose to replace N., of whom
rumour said that he was desperately in love with the same lady. As for
the newly arrived guest, he had for a long time past been on the same
terms as Benedick with Beatrice, in Shakespeare's _Much Ado about
Nothing_. In short, the fair beauty was in her very best form that day.
Her chatter and her jests were so full of grace, so trustfully naïve, so
innocently careless, she was persuaded of the general enthusiasm with
such graceful self-confidence that she really was all the time the
centre of peculiar adoration. A throng of surprised and admiring
listeners was continually round her, and she had never been so
fascinating. Every word she uttered was marvellous and seductive, was
caught up and handed round in the circle, and not one word, one jest,
one sally was lost. I fancy no one had expected from her such taste,
such brilliance, such wit. Her best qualities were, as a rule, buried
under the most harum-scarum wilfulness, the most schoolboyish pranks,
almost verging on buffoonery; they were rarely noticed, and, when they
were, were hardly believed in, so that now her extraordinary brilliancy
was accompanied by an eager whisper of amazement among all. There was,
however, one peculiar and rather delicate circumstance, judging at least
by the part in it played by Mme. M.'s husband, which contributed to her
success. The madcap ventured--and I must add to the satisfaction of
almost every one or, at any rate, to the satisfaction of all the young
people--to make a furious attack upon him, owing to many causes,
probably of great consequence in her eyes. She carried on with him a
regular cross-fire of witticisms, of mocking and sarcastic sallies, of
that most illusive and treacherous kind that, smoothly wrapped up on the
surface, hit the mark without giving the victim anything to lay hold of,
and exhaust him in fruitless efforts to repel the attack, reducing him
to fury and comic despair.

I don't know for certain, but I fancy the whole proceeding was not
improvised but premeditated. This desperate duel had begun earlier, at
dinner. I call it desperate because M. M. was not quick to surrender. He
had to call upon all his presence of mind, all his sharp wit and rare
resourcefulness not to be completely covered with ignominy. The conflict
was accompanied by the continual and irrepressible laughter of all who
witnessed and took part in it. That day was for him very different from
the day before. It was noticeable that Mme. M. several times did her
utmost to stop her indiscreet friend, who was certainly trying to depict
the jealous husband in the most grotesque and absurd guise, in the guise
of "a bluebeard" it must be supposed, judging from all probabilities,
from what has remained in my memory and finally from the part which I
myself was destined to play in the affair.

I was drawn into it in a most absurd manner, quite unexpectedly. And as
ill-luck would have it at that moment I was standing where I could be
seen, suspecting no evil and actually forgetting the precautions I had
so long practised. Suddenly I was brought into the foreground as a sworn
foe and natural rival of M. M., as desperately in love with his wife, of
which my persecutress vowed and swore that she had proofs, saying that
only that morning she had seen in the copse....

But before she had time to finish I broke in at the most desperate
minute. That minute was so diabolically calculated, was so treacherously
prepared to lead up to its finale, its ludicrous _dénouement_, and was
brought out with such killing humour that a perfect outburst of
irrepressible mirth saluted this last sally. And though even at the time
I guessed that mine was not the most unpleasant part in the performance,
yet I was so confused, so irritated and alarmed that, full of misery and
despair, gasping with shame and tears, I dashed through two rows of
chairs, stepped forward, and addressing my tormentor, cried, in a voice
broken with tears and indignation:

"Aren't you ashamed ... aloud ... before all the ladies ... to tell such
a wicked ... lie?... Like a small child ... before all these men....
What will they say?... A big girl like you ... and married!..."

But I could not go on, there was a deafening roar of applause. My
outburst created a perfect furore. My naïve gesture, my tears, and
especially the fact that I seemed to be defending M. M., all this
provoked such fiendish laughter, that even now I cannot help laughing at
the mere recollection of it. I was overcome with confusion, senseless
with horror and, burning with shame, hiding my face in my hands rushed
away, knocked a tray out of the hands of a footman who was coming in at
the door, and flew upstairs to my own room. I pulled out the key, which
was on the outside of the door, and locked myself in. I did well, for
there was a hue and cry after me. Before a minute had passed my door was
besieged by a mob of the prettiest ladies. I heard their ringing
laughter, their incessant chatter, their trilling voices; they were all
twittering at once, like swallows. All of them, every one of them,
begged and besought me to open the door, if only for a moment; swore
that no harm should come to me, only that they wanted to smother me with
kisses. But ... what could be more horrible than this novel threat? I
simply burned with shame the other side of the door, hiding my face in
the pillows and did not open, did not even respond. The ladies kept up
their knocking for a long time, but I was deaf and obdurate as only a
boy of eleven could be.

But what could I do now? Everything was laid bare, everything had been
exposed, everything I had so jealously guarded and concealed!...
Everlasting disgrace and shame had fallen on me! But it is true that I
could not myself have said why I was frightened and what I wanted to
hide; yet I was frightened of something and had trembled like a leaf at
the thought of _that something's_ being discovered. Only till that
minute I had not known what it was: whether it was good or bad, splendid
or shameful, praiseworthy or reprehensible? Now in my distress, in the
misery that had been forced upon me, I learned that it was _absurd_ and
_shameful_. Instinctively I felt at the same time that this verdict was
false, inhuman, and coarse; but I was crushed, annihilated;
consciousness seemed checked in me and thrown into confusion; I could
not stand up against that verdict, nor criticize it properly. I was
befogged; I only felt that my heart had been inhumanly and shamelessly
wounded, and was brimming over with impotent tears. I was irritated; but
I was boiling with indignation and hate such as I had never felt before,
for it was the first time in my life that I had known real sorrow,
insult, and injury--and it was truly that, without any exaggeration. The
first untried, unformed feeling had been so coarsely handled in me, a
child. The first fragrant, virginal modesty had been so soon exposed and
insulted, and the first and perhaps very real and æsthetic impression
had been so outraged. Of course there was much my persecutors did not
know and did not divine in my sufferings. One circumstance, which I had
not succeeded in analysing till then, of which I had been as it were
afraid, partly entered into it. I went on lying on my bed in despair and
misery, hiding my face in my pillow, and I was alternately feverish and
shivery. I was tormented by two questions: first, what had the wretched
fair beauty seen, and, in fact, what could she have seen that morning in
the copse between Mme. M. and me? And secondly, how could I now look
Mme. M. in the face without dying on the spot of shame and despair?

An extraordinary noise in the yard roused me at last from the state of
semi-consciousness into which I had fallen. I got up and went to the
window. The whole yard was packed with carriages, saddle-horses, and
bustling servants. It seemed that they were all setting off; some of the
gentlemen had already mounted their horses, others were taking their
places in the carriages.... Then I remembered the expedition to the
village fête, and little by little an uneasiness came over me; I began
anxiously looking for my pony in the yard; but there was no pony there,
so they must have forgotten me. I could not restrain myself, and rushed
headlong downstairs, thinking no more of unpleasant meetings or my
recent ignominy....

Terrible news awaited me. There was neither a horse nor seat in any of
the carriages to spare for me; everything had been arranged, all the
seats were taken, and I was forced to give place to others. Overwhelmed
by this fresh blow, I stood on the steps and looked mournfully at the
long rows of coaches, carriages, and chaises, in which there was not the
tiniest corner left for me, and at the smartly dressed ladies, whose
horses were restlessly curvetting.

One of the gentlemen was late. They were only waiting for his arrival to
set off. His horse was standing at the door, champing the bit, pawing
the earth with his hoofs, and at every moment starting and rearing. Two
stable-boys were carefully holding him by the bridle, and every one else
apprehensively stood at a respectful distance from him.

A most vexatious circumstance had occurred, which prevented my going. In
addition to the fact that new visitors had arrived, filling up all the
seats, two of the horses had fallen ill, one of them being my pony. But
I was not the only person to suffer: it appeared that there was no horse
for our new visitor, the pale-faced young man of whom I have spoken
already. To get over this difficulty our host had been obliged to have
recourse to the extreme step of offering his fiery unbroken stallion,
adding, to satisfy his conscience, that it was impossible to ride him,
and that they had long intended to sell the beast for its vicious
character, if only a purchaser could be found.

But, in spite of his warning, the visitor declared that he was a good
horseman, and in any case ready to mount anything rather than not go.
Our host said no more, but now I fancied that a sly and ambiguous smile
was straying on his lips. He waited for the gentleman who had spoken so
well of his own horsemanship, and stood, without mounting his horse,
impatiently rubbing his hands and continually glancing towards the door;
some similar feeling seemed shared by the two stable-boys, who were
holding the stallion, almost breathless with pride at seeing themselves
before the whole company in charge of a horse which might any minute
kill a man for no reason whatever. Something akin to their master's sly
smile gleamed, too, in their eyes, which were round with expectation,
and fixed upon the door from which the bold visitor was to appear. The
horse himself, too, behaved as though he were in league with our host
and the stable-boys. He bore himself proudly and haughtily, as though he
felt that he were being watched by several dozen curious eyes and were
glorying in his evil reputation exactly as some incorrigible rogue might
glory in his criminal exploits. He seemed to be defying the bold man who
would venture to curb his independence.

That bold man did at last make his appearance. Conscience-stricken at
having kept every one waiting, hurriedly drawing on his gloves, he came
forward without looking at anything, ran down the steps, and only raised
his eyes as he stretched out his hand to seize the mane of the waiting
horse. But he was at once disconcerted by his frantic rearing and a
warning scream from the frightened spectators. The young man stepped
back and looked in perplexity at the vicious horse, which was quivering
all over, snorting with anger, and rolling his bloodshot eyes
ferociously, continually rearing on his hind legs and flinging up his
fore legs as though he meant to bolt into the air and carry the two
stable-boys with him. For a minute the young man stood completely
nonplussed; then, flushing slightly with some embarrassment, he raised
his eyes and looked at the frightened ladies.

"A very fine horse!" he said, as though to himself, "and to my thinking
it ought to be a great pleasure to ride him; but ... but do you know, I
think I won't go?" he concluded, turning to our host with the broad,
good-natured smile which so suited his kind and clever face.

"Yet I consider you are an excellent horseman, I assure you," answered
the owner of the unapproachable horse, delighted, and he warmly and even
gratefully pressed the young man's hand, "just because from the first
moment you saw the sort of brute you had to deal with," he added with
dignity. "Would you believe me, though I have served twenty-three years
in the hussars, yet I've had the pleasure of being laid on the ground
three times, thanks to that beast, that is, as often as I mounted the
useless animal. Tancred, my boy, there's no one here fit for you! Your
rider, it seems, must be some Ilya Muromets, and he must be sitting
quiet now in the village of Kapatcharovo, waiting for your teeth to fall
out. Come, take him away, he has frightened people enough. It was a
waste of time to bring him out," he cried, rubbing his hands
complacently.

It must be observed that Tancred was no sort of use to his master and
simply ate corn for nothing; moreover, the old hussar had lost his
reputation for a knowledge of horseflesh by paying a fabulous sum for
the worthless beast, which he had purchased only for his beauty ... yet
he was delighted now that Tancred had kept up his reputation, had
disposed of another rider, and so had drawn closer on himself fresh
senseless laurels.

"So you are not going?" cried the blonde beauty, who was particularly
anxious that her _cavaliere servente_ should be in attendance on this
occasion. "Surely you are not frightened?"

"Upon my word I am," answered the young man.

"Are you in earnest?"

"Why, do you want me to break my neck?"

"Then make haste and get on my horse; don't be afraid, it is very quiet.
We won't delay them, they can change the saddles in a minute! I'll try
to take yours. Surely Tancred can't always be so unruly."

No sooner said than done, the madcap leaped out of the saddle and was
standing before us as she finished the last sentence.

"You don't know Tancred, if you think he will allow your wretched
side-saddle to be put on him! Besides, I would not let you break your
neck, it would be a pity!" said our host, at that moment of inward
gratification affecting, as his habit was, a studied brusqueness and
even coarseness of speech which he thought in keeping with a jolly good
fellow and an old soldier, and which he imagined to be particularly
attractive to the ladies. This was one of his favourite fancies, his
favourite whim, with which we were all familiar.

"Well, cry-baby, wouldn't you like to have a try? You wanted so much to
go?" said the valiant horsewoman, noticing me and pointing tauntingly at
Tancred, because I had been so imprudent as to catch her eye, and she
would not let me go without a biting word, that she might not have
dismounted from her horse absolutely for nothing.

"I expect you are not such a---- We all know you are a hero and would be
ashamed to be afraid; especially when you will be looked at, you fine
page," she added, with a fleeting glance at Mme. M., whose carriage was
the nearest to the entrance.

A rush of hatred and vengeance had flooded my heart, when the fair
Amazon had approached us with the intention of mounting Tancred.... But
I cannot describe what I felt at this unexpected challenge from the
madcap. Everything was dark before my eyes when I saw her glance at Mme.
M. For an instant an idea flashed through my mind ... but it was only a
moment, less than a moment, like a flash of gunpowder; perhaps it was
the last straw, and I suddenly now was moved to rage as my spirit rose,
so that I longed to put all my enemies to utter confusion, and to
revenge myself on all of them and before everyone, by showing the sort
of person I was. Or whether by some miracle, some prompting from
mediæval history, of which I had known nothing till then, sent whirling
through my giddy brain, images of tournaments, paladins, heroes, lovely
ladies, the clash of swords, shouts and the applause of the crowd, and
amidst those shouts the timid cry of a frightened heart, which moves the
proud soul more sweetly than victory and fame--I don't know whether all
this romantic nonsense was in my head at the time, or whether, more
likely, only the first dawning of the inevitable nonsense that was in
store for me in the future, anyway, I felt that my hour had come. My
heart leaped and shuddered, and I don't remember how, at one bound, I
was down the steps and beside Tancred.

"You think I am afraid?" I cried, boldly and proudly, in such a fever
that I could hardly see, breathless with excitement, and flushing till
the tears scalded my cheeks. "Well, you shall see!" And clutching at
Tancred's mane I put my foot in the stirrup before they had time to make
a movement to stop me; but at that instant Tancred reared, jerked his
head, and with a mighty bound forward wrenched himself out of the hands
of the petrified stable-boys, and dashed off like a hurricane, while
every one cried out in horror.

Goodness knows how I got my other leg over the horse while it was in
full gallop; I can't imagine, either, how I did not lose hold of the
reins. Tancred bore me beyond the trellis gate, turned sharply to the
right and flew along beside the fence regardless of the road. Only at
that moment I heard behind me a shout from fifty voices, and that shout
was echoed in my swooning heart with such a feeling of pride and
pleasure that I shall never forget that mad moment of my boyhood. All
the blood rushed to my head, bewildering me and overpowering my fears. I
was beside myself. There certainly was, as I remember it now, something
of the knight-errant about the exploit.

My knightly exploits, however, were all over in an instant or it would
have gone badly with the knight. And, indeed, I do not know how I
escaped as it was. I did know how to ride, I had been taught. But my
pony was more like a sheep than a riding horse. No doubt I should have
been thrown off Tancred if he had had time to throw me, but after
galloping fifty paces he suddenly took fright at a huge stone which lay
across the road and bolted back. He turned sharply, galloping at full
speed, so that it is a puzzle to me even now that I was not sent
spinning out of the saddle and flying like a ball for twenty feet, that
I was not dashed to pieces, and that Tancred did not dislocate his leg
by such a sudden turn. He rushed back to the gate, tossing his head
furiously, bounding from side to side as though drunk with rage,
flinging his legs at random in the air, and at every leap trying to
shake me off his back as though a tiger had leaped on him and were
thrusting its teeth and claws into his back.

In another instant I should have flown off; I was falling; but several
gentlemen flew to my rescue. Two of them intercepted the way into the
open country, two others galloped up, closing in upon Tancred so that
their horses' sides almost crushed my legs, and both of them caught him
by the bridle. A few seconds later we were back at the steps.

They lifted me down from the horse, pale and scarcely breathing. I was
shaking like a blade of grass in the wind; it was the same with Tancred,
who was standing, his hoofs as it were thrust into the earth and his
whole body thrown back, puffing his fiery breath from red and streaming
nostrils, twitching and quivering all over, seeming overwhelmed with
wounded pride and anger at a child's being so bold with impunity. All
around me I heard cries of bewilderment, surprise, and alarm.

At that moment my straying eyes caught those of Mme. M., who looked pale
and agitated, and--I can never forget that moment--in one instant my
face was flooded with colour, glowed and burned like fire; I don't know
what happened to me, but confused and frightened by my own feelings I
timidly dropped my eyes to the ground. But my glance was noticed, it was
caught, it was stolen from me. All eyes turned on Mme. M., and finding
herself unawares the centre of attention, she, too, flushed like a child
from some naïve and involuntary feeling and made an unsuccessful effort
to cover her confusion by laughing....

All this, of course, was very absurd-looking from outside, but at that
moment an extremely naïve and unexpected circumstance saved me from
being laughed at by every one, and gave a special colour to the whole
adventure. The lovely persecutor who was the instigator of the whole
escapade, and who till then had been my irreconcileable foe, suddenly
rushed up to embrace and kiss me. She had hardly been able to believe
her eyes when she saw me dare to accept her challenge, and pick up the
gauntlet she had flung at me by glancing at Mme. M. She had almost died
of terror and self-reproach when I had flown off on Tancred; now, when
it was all over, and particularly when she caught the glance at Mme. M.,
my confusion and my sudden flush of colour, when the romantic strain in
her frivolous little head had given a new secret, unspoken significance
to the moment--she was moved to such enthusiasm over my "knightliness,"
that touched, joyful and proud of me, she rushed up and pressed me to
her bosom. She lifted the most naïve, stern-looking little face, on
which there quivered and gleamed two little crystal tears, and gazing at
the crowd that thronged about her said in a grave, earnest voice, such
as they had never heard her use before, pointing to me: "Mais c'est très
sérieux, messieurs, ne riez pas!" She did not notice that all were
standing, as though fascinated, admiring her bright enthusiasm. Her
swift, unexpected action, her earnest little face, the simple-hearted
naïveté, the unexpected feeling betrayed by the tears that welled in her
invariably laughter-loving eyes, were such a surprise that every one
stood before her as though electrified by her expression, her rapid,
fiery words and gestures. It seemed as though no one could take his eyes
off her for fear of missing that rare moment in her enthusiastic face.
Even our host flushed crimson as a tulip, and people declared that they
heard him confess afterwards that "to his shame" he had been in love for
a whole minute with his charming guest. Well, of course, after this I
was a knight, a hero.

"De Lorge! Toggenburg!" was heard in the crowd.

There was a sound of applause.

"Hurrah for the rising generation!" added the host.

"But he is coming with us, he certainly must come with us," said the
beauty; "we will find him a place, we must find him a place. He shall
sit beside me, on my knee ... but no, no! That's a mistake!..." she
corrected herself, laughing, unable to restrain her mirth at our first
encounter. But as she laughed she stroked my hand tenderly, doing all
she could to soften me, that I might not be offended.

"Of course, of course," several voices chimed in; "he must go, he has
won his place."

The matter was settled in a trice. The same old maid who had brought
about my acquaintance with the blonde beauty was at once besieged with
entreaties from all the younger people to remain at home and let me have
her seat. She was forced to consent, to her intense vexation, with a
smile and a stealthy hiss of anger. Her protectress, who was her usual
refuge, my former foe and new friend, called to her as she galloped off
on her spirited horse, laughing like a child, that she envied her and
would have been glad to stay at home herself, for it was just going to
rain and we should all get soaked.

And she was right in predicting rain. A regular downpour came on within
an hour and the expedition was done for. We had to take shelter for some
hours in the huts of the village, and had to return home between nine
and ten in the evening in the damp mist that followed the rain. I began
to be a little feverish. At the minute when I was starting, Mme. M. came
up to me and expressed surprise that my neck was uncovered and that I
had nothing on over my jacket. I answered that I had not had time to get
my coat. She took out a pin and pinned up the turned down collar of my
shirt, took off her own neck a crimson gauze kerchief, and put it round
my neck that I might not get a sore throat. She did this so hurriedly
that I had not time even to thank her.

But when we got home I found her in the little drawing-room with the
blonde beauty and the pale-faced young man who had gained glory for
horsemanship that day by refusing to ride Tancred. I went up to thank
her and give back the scarf. But now, after all my adventures, I felt
somehow ashamed. I wanted to make haste and get upstairs, there at my
leisure to reflect and consider. I was brimming over with impressions.
As I gave back the kerchief I blushed up to my ears, as usual.

"I bet he would like to keep the kerchief," said the young man laughing.
"One can see that he is sorry to part with your scarf."

"That's it, that's it!" the fair lady put in. "What a boy! Oh!" she
said, shaking her head with obvious vexation, but she stopped in time at
a grave glance from Mme. M., who did not want to carry the jest too far.

I made haste to get away.

"Well, you are a boy," said the madcap, overtaking me in the next room
and affectionately taking me by both hands, "why, you should have simply
not returned the kerchief if you wanted so much to have it. You should
have said you put it down somewhere, and that would have been the end of
it. What a simpleton! Couldn't even do that! What a funny boy!"

And she tapped me on the chin with her finger, laughing at my having
flushed as red as a poppy.

"I am your friend now, you know; am I not? Our enmity is over, isn't it?
Yes or no?"

I laughed and pressed her fingers without a word.

"Oh, why are you so ... why are you so pale and shivering? Have you
caught a chill?"

"Yes, I don't feel well."

"Ah, poor fellow! That's the result of over-excitement. Do you know
what? You had better go to bed without sitting up for supper, and you
will be all right in the morning. Come along."

She took me upstairs, and there was no end to the care she lavished on
me. Leaving me to undress she ran downstairs, got me some tea, and
brought it up herself when I was in bed. She brought me up a warm quilt
as well. I was much impressed and touched by all the care and attention
lavished on me; or perhaps I was affected by the whole day, the
expedition and feverishness. As I said good-night to her I hugged her
warmly, as though she were my dearest and nearest friend, and in my
exhausted state all the emotions of the day came back to me in a rush; I
almost shed tears as I nestled to her bosom. She noticed my overwrought
condition, and I believe my madcap herself was a little touched.

"You are a very good boy," she said, looking at me with gentle eyes,
"please don't be angry with me. You won't, will you?"

In fact, we became the warmest and truest of friends.

It was rather early when I woke up, but the sun was already flooding the
whole room with brilliant light. I jumped out of bed feeling perfectly
well and strong, as though I had had no fever the day before; indeed, I
felt now unutterably joyful. I recalled the previous day and felt that I
would have given any happiness if I could at that minute have embraced
my new friend, the fair-haired beauty, again, as I had the night before;
but it was very early and every one was still asleep. Hurriedly dressing
I went out into the garden and from there into the copse. I made my way
where the leaves were thickest, where the fragrance of the trees was
more resinous, and where the sun peeped in most gaily, rejoicing that it
could penetrate the dense darkness of the foliage. It was a lovely
morning.

Going on further and further, before I was aware of it I had reached the
further end of the copse and came out on the river Moskva. It flowed at
the bottom of the hill two hundred paces below. On the opposite bank of
the river they were mowing. I watched whole rows of sharp scythes gleam
all together in the sunlight at every swing of the mower and then vanish
again like little fiery snakes going into hiding; I watched the cut
grass flying on one side in dense rich swathes and being laid in long
straight lines. I don't know how long I spent in contemplation. At last
I was roused from my reverie by hearing a horse snorting and impatiently
pawing the ground twenty paces from me, in the track which ran from the
high road to the manor house. I don't know whether I heard this horse as
soon as the rider rode up and stopped there, or whether the sound had
long been in my ears without rousing me from my dreaming. Moved by
curiosity I went into the copse, and before I had gone many steps I
caught the sound of voices speaking rapidly, though in subdued tones. I
went up closer, carefully parting the branches of the bushes that edged
the path, and at once sprang back in amazement. I caught a glimpse of a
familiar white dress and a soft feminine voice resounded like music in
my heart. It was Mme. M. She was standing beside a man on horseback who,
stooping down from the saddle, was hurriedly talking to her, and to my
amazement I recognized him as N., the young man who had gone away the
morning before and over whose departure M. M. had been so busy. But
people had said at the time that he was going far away to somewhere in
the South of Russia, and so I was very much surprised at seeing him with
us again so early, and alone with Mme. M.

She was moved and agitated as I had never seen her before, and tears
were glistening on her cheeks. The young man was holding her hand and
stooping down to kiss it. I had come upon them at the moment of parting.
They seemed to be in haste. At last he took out of his pocket a sealed
envelope, gave it to Mme. M., put one arm round her, still not
dismounting, and gave her a long, fervent kiss. A minute later he lashed
his horse and flew past me like an arrow. Mme. M. looked after him for
some moments, then pensively and disconsolately turned homewards. But
after going a few steps along the track she seemed suddenly to recollect
herself, hurriedly parted the bushes and walked on through the copse.

I followed her, surprised and perplexed by all that I had seen. My heart
was beating violently, as though from terror. I was, as it were,
benumbed and befogged; my ideas were shattered and turned upside down;
but I remember I was, for some reason, very sad. I got glimpses from
time to time through the green foliage of her white dress before me: I
followed her mechanically, never losing sight of her, though I trembled
at the thought that she might notice me. At last she came out on the
little path that led to the house. After waiting half a minute I, too,
emerged from the bushes; but what was my amazement when I saw lying on
the red sand of the path a sealed packet, which I recognized, from the
first glance, as the one that had been given to Mme. M. ten minutes
before.

I picked it up. On both sides the paper was blank, there was no address
on it. The envelope was not large, but it was fat and heavy, as though
there were three or more sheets of notepaper in it.

What was the meaning of this envelope? No doubt it would explain the
whole mystery. Perhaps in it there was said all that N. had scarcely
hoped to express in their brief, hurried interview. He had not even
dismounted.... Whether he had been in haste or whether he had been
afraid of being false to himself at the hour of parting--God only
knows....

I stopped, without coming out on the path, threw the envelope in the
most conspicuous place on it, and kept my eyes upon it, supposing that
Mme. M. would notice the loss and come back and look for it. But after
waiting four minutes I could stand it no longer, I picked up my find
again, put it in my pocket, and set off to overtake Mme. M. I came upon
her in the big avenue in the garden. She was walking straight towards
the house with a swift and hurried step, though she was lost in thought,
and her eyes were on the ground. I did not know what to do. Go up to
her, give it her? That would be as good as saying that I knew
everything, that I had seen it all. I should betray myself at the first
word. And how should I look, at her? How would she look at me. I kept
expecting that she would discover her loss and return on her tracks.
Then I could, unnoticed, have flung the envelope on the path and she
would have found it. But no! We were approaching the house; she had
already been noticed....

As ill-luck would have it every one had got up very early that day,
because, after the unsuccessful expedition of the evening before, they
had arranged something new, of which I had heard nothing. All were
preparing to set off, and were having breakfast in the verandah. I
waited for ten minutes, that I might not be seen with Mme. M., and
making a circuit of the garden approached the house from the other side
a long time after her. She was walking up and down the verandah with her
arms folded, looking pale and agitated, and was obviously trying her
utmost to suppress the agonizing, despairing misery which could be
plainly discerned in her eyes, her walk, her every movement. Sometimes
she went down the verandah steps and walked a few paces among the
flower-beds in the direction of the garden; her eyes were impatiently,
greedily, even incautiously, seeking something on the sand of the path
and on the floor of the verandah. There could be no doubt she had
discovered her loss and imagined she had dropped the letter somewhere
here, near the house--yes, that must be so, she was convinced of it.

Some one noticed that she was pale and agitated, and others made the
same remark. She was besieged with questions about her health and
condolences. She had to laugh, to jest, to appear lively. From time to
time she looked at her husband, who was standing at the end of the
terrace talking to two ladies, and the poor woman was overcome by the
same shudder, the same embarrassment, as on the day of his first
arrival. Thrusting my hand into my pocket and holding the letter tight
in it, I stood at a little distance from them all, praying to fate that
Mme. M. should notice me. I longed to cheer her up, to relieve her
anxiety if only by a glance; to say a word to her on the sly. But when
she did chance to look at me I dropped my eyes.

I saw her distress and I was not mistaken. To this day I don't know her
secret. I know nothing but what I saw and what I have just described.
The intrigue was not such, perhaps, as one might suppose at the first
glance. Perhaps that kiss was the kiss of farewell, perhaps it was the
last slight reward for the sacrifice made to her peace and honour. N.
was going away, he was leaving her, perhaps for ever. Even that letter I
was holding in my hand--who can tell what it contained! How can one
judge? and who can condemn? And yet there is no doubt that the sudden
discovery of her secret would have been terrible--would have been a
fatal blow for her. I still remember her face at that minute, it could
not have shown more suffering. To feel, to know, to be convinced, to
expect, as though it were one's execution, that in a quarter of an hour,
in a minute perhaps, all might be discovered, the letter might be found
by some one, picked up; there was no address on it, it might be opened,
and then.... What then? What torture could be worse than what was
awaiting her? She moved about among those who would be her judges. In
another minute their smiling flattering faces would be menacing and
merciless. She would read mockery, malice and icy contempt on those
faces, and then her life would be plunged in everlasting darkness, with
no dawn to follow.... Yes, I did not understand it then as I understand
it now. I could only have vague suspicions and misgivings, and a
heart-ache at the thought of her danger, which I could not fully
understand. But whatever lay hidden in her secret, much was expiated, if
expiation were needed, by those moments of anguish of which I was
witness and which I shall never forget.

But then came a cheerful summons to set off; immediately every one was
bustling about gaily; laughter and lively chatter were heard on all
sides. Within two minutes the verandah was deserted. Mme. M. declined to
join the party, acknowledging at last that she was not well. But, thank
God, all the others set off, every one was in haste, and there was no
time to worry her with commiseration, inquiries, and advice. A few
remained at home. Her husband said a few words to her; she answered that
she would be all right directly, that he need not be uneasy, that there
was no occasion for her to lie down, that she would go into the garden,
alone ... with me ... here she glanced at me. Nothing could be more
fortunate! I flushed with pleasure, with delight; a minute later we were
on the way.

She walked along the same avenues and paths by which she had returned
from the copse, instinctively remembering the way she had come, gazing
before her with her eyes fixed on the ground, looking about intently
without answering me, possibly forgetting that I was walking beside her.

But when we had already reached the place where I had picked up the
letter, and the path ended, Mme. M. suddenly stopped, and in a voice
faint and weak with misery said that she felt worse, and that she would
go home. But when she reached the garden fence she stopped again and
thought a minute; a smile of despair came on her lips, and utterly worn
out and exhausted, resigned, and making up her mind to the worst, she
turned without a word and retraced her steps, even forgetting to tell me
of her intention.

My heart was torn with sympathy, and I did not know what to do.

We went, or rather I led her, to the place from which an hour before I
had heard the tramp of a horse and their conversation. Here, close to a
shady elm tree, was a seat hewn out of one huge stone, about which grew
ivy, wild jasmine, and dog-rose; the whole wood was dotted with little
bridges, arbours, grottoes, and similar surprises. Mme. M. sat down on
the bench and glanced unconsciously at the marvellous view that lay open
before us. A minute later she opened her book, and fixed her eyes upon
it without reading, without turning the pages, almost unconscious of
what she was doing. It was about half-past nine. The sun was already
high and was floating gloriously in the deep, dark blue sky, as though
melting away in its own light. The mowers were by now far away; they
were scarcely visible from our side of the river; endless ridges of mown
grass crept after them in unbroken succession, and from time to time the
faintly stirring breeze wafted their fragrance to us. The never ceasing
concert of those who "sow not, neither do they reap" and are free as the
air they cleave with their sportive wings was all about us. It seemed as
though at that moment every flower, every blade of grass was exhaling
the aroma of sacrifice, was saying to its Creator, "Father, I am blessed
and happy."

I glanced at the poor woman, who alone was like one dead amidst all this
joyous life; two big tears hung motionless on her lashes, wrung from her
heart by bitter grief. It was in my power to relieve and console this
poor, fainting heart, only I did not know how to approach the subject,
how to take the first step. I was in agonies. A hundred times I was on
the point of going up to her, but every time my face glowed like fire.

Suddenly a bright idea dawned upon me. I had found a way of doing it; I
revived.

"Would you like me to pick you a nosegay?" I said, in such a joyful
voice that Mme M. immediately raised her head and looked at me intently.

"Yes, do," she said at last in a weak voice, with a faint smile, at once
dropping her eyes on the book again.

"Or soon they will be mowing the grass here and there will be no
flowers," I cried, eagerly setting to work.

I had soon picked my nosegay, a poor, simple one, I should have been
ashamed to take it indoors; but how light my heart was as I picked the
flowers and tied them up! The dog-rose and the wild jasmine I picked
closer to the seat, I knew that not far off there was a field of rye,
not yet ripe. I ran there for cornflowers; I mixed them with tall ears
of rye, picking out the finest and most golden. Close by I came upon a
perfect nest of forget-me-nots, and my nosegay was almost complete.
Farther away in the meadow there were dark-blue campanulas and wild
pinks, and I ran down to the very edge of the river to get yellow
water-lilies. At last, making my way back, and going for an instant into
the wood to get some bright green fan-shaped leaves of the maple to put
round the nosegay, I happened to come across a whole family of pansies,
close to which, luckily for me, the fragrant scent of violets betrayed
the little flower hiding in the thick lush grass and still glistening
with drops of dew. The nosegay was complete. I bound it round with fine
long grass which twisted into a rope, and I carefully lay the letter in
the centre, hiding it with the flowers, but in such a way that it could
be very easily noticed if the slightest attention were bestowed upon my
nosegay.

I carried it to Mme. M.

On the way it seemed to me that the letter was lying too much in view: I
hid it a little more. As I got nearer I thrust it still further in the
flowers; and finally, when I was on the spot, I suddenly poked it so
deeply into the centre of the nosegay that it could not be noticed at
all from outside. My cheeks were positively flaming. I wanted to hide my
face in my hands and run away at once, but she glanced at my flowers as
though she had completely forgotten that I had gathered them.
Mechanically, almost without looking, she held out her hand and took my
present; but at once laid it on the seat as though I had handed it to
her for that purpose and dropped her eyes to her book again, seeming
lost in thought. I was ready to cry at this mischance. "If only my
nosegay were close to her," I thought; "if only she had not forgotten
it!" I lay down on the grass not far off, put my right arm under my
head, and closed my eyes as though I were overcome by drowsiness. But I
waited, keeping my eyes fixed on her.

Ten minutes passed, it seemed to me that she was getting paler and paler
... fortunately a blessed chance came to my aid.

This was a big, golden bee, brought by a kindly breeze, luckily for me.
It first buzzed over my head, and then flew up to Mme. M. She waved it
off once or twice, but the bee grew more and more persistent. At last
Mme. M. snatched up my nosegay and waved it before my face. At that
instant the letter dropped out from among the flowers and fell straight
upon the open book. I started. For some time Mme. M., mute with
amazement, stared first at the letter and then at the flowers which she
was holding in her hands, and she seemed unable to believe her eyes. All
at once she flushed, started, and glanced at me. But I caught her
movement and I shut my eyes tight, pretending to be asleep. Nothing
would have induced me to look her straight in the face at that moment.
My heart was throbbing and leaping like a bird in the grasp of some
village boy. I don't remember how long I lay with my eyes shut, two or
three minutes. At last I ventured to open them. Mme. M. was greedily
reading the letter, and from her glowing cheeks, her sparkling, tearful
eyes, her bright face, every feature of which was quivering with joyful
emotion, I guessed that there was happiness in the letter and all her
misery was dispersed like smoke. An agonizing, sweet feeling gnawed at
my heart, it was hard for me to go on pretending....

I shall never forget that minute!

Suddenly, a long way off, we heard voices--

"Mme. M.! Natalie! Natalie!"

Mme. M. did not answer, but she got up quickly from the seat, came up to
me and bent over me. I felt that she was looking straight into my face.
My eyelashes quivered, but I controlled myself and did not open my eyes.
I tried to breathe more evenly and quietly, but my heart smothered me
with its violent throbbing. Her burning breath scorched my cheeks; she
bent close down to my face as though trying to make sure. At last a kiss
and tears fell on my hand, the one which was lying on my breast.

"Natalie! Natalie! where are you," we heard again, this time quite
close.

"Coming," said Mme. M., in her mellow, silvery voice, which was so
choked and quivering with tears and so subdued that no one but I could
hear that, "Coming!"

But at that instant my heart at last betrayed me and seemed to send all
my blood rushing to my face. At that instant a swift, burning kiss
scalded my lips. I uttered a faint cry. I opened my eyes, but at once
the same gauze kerchief fell upon them, as though she meant to screen me
from the sun. An instant later she was gone. I heard nothing but the
sound of rapidly retreating steps. I was alone....

I pulled off her kerchief and kissed it, beside myself with rapture; for
some moments I was almost frantic.... Hardly able to breathe, leaning on
my elbow on the grass, I stared unconsciously before me at the
surrounding slopes, streaked with cornfields, at the river that flowed
twisting and winding far away, as far as the eye could see, between
fresh hills and villages that gleamed like dots all over the sunlit
distance--at the dark-blue, hardly visible forests, which seemed as
though smoking at the edge of the burning sky, and a sweet stillness
inspired by the triumphant peacefulness of the picture gradually brought
calm to my troubled heart. I felt more at ease and breathed more freely,
but my whole soul was full of a dumb, sweet yearning, as though a veil
had been drawn from my eyes as though at a foretaste of something. My
frightened heart, faintly quivering with expectation, was groping
timidly and joyfully towards some conjecture ... and all at once my
bosom heaved, began aching as though something had pierced it, and
tears, sweet tears, gushed from my eyes. I hid my face in my hands, and
quivering like a blade of grass, gave myself up to the first
consciousness and revelation of my heart, the first vague glimpse of my
nature. My childhood was over from that moment.

       *     *     *     *     *

When two hours later I returned home I did not find Mme. M. Through some
sudden chance she had gone back to Moscow with her husband. I never saw
her again.




MR. PROHARTCHIN

A STORY


In the darkest and humblest corner of Ustinya Fyodorovna's flat lived
Semyon Ivanovitch Prohartchin, a well-meaning elderly man, who did not
drink. Since Mr. Prohartchin was of a very humble grade in the service,
and received a salary strictly proportionate to his official capacity,
Ustinya Fyodorovna could not get more than five roubles a month from him
for his lodging. Some people said that she had her own reasons for
accepting him as a lodger; but, be that as it may, as though in despite
of all his detractors, Mr. Prohartchin actually became her favourite, in
an honourable and virtuous sense, of course. It must be observed that
Ustinya Fyodorovna, a very respectable woman, who had a special
partiality for meat and coffee, and found it difficult to keep the
fasts, let rooms to several other boarders who paid twice as much as
Semyon Ivanovitch, yet not being quiet lodgers, but on the contrary all
of them "spiteful scoffers" at her feminine ways and her forlorn
helplessness, stood very low in her good opinion, so that if it had not
been for the rent they paid, she would not have cared to let them stay,
nor indeed to see them in her flat at all. Semyon Ivanovitch had become
her favourite from the day when a retired, or, perhaps more correctly
speaking, discharged clerk, with a weakness for strong drink, was
carried to his last resting-place in Volkovo. Though this gentleman had
only one eye, having had the other knocked out owing, in his own words,
to his valiant behaviour; and only one leg, the other having been broken
in the same way owing to his valour; yet he had succeeded in winning all
the kindly feeling of which Ustinya Fyodorovna was capable, and took the
fullest advantage of it, and would probably have gone on for years
living as her devoted satellite and toady if he had not finally drunk
himself to death in the most pitiable way. All this had happened at
Peski, where Ustinya Fyodorovna only had three lodgers, of whom, when
she moved into a new flat and set up on a larger scale, letting to about
a dozen new boarders, Mr. Prohartchin was the only one who remained.

Whether Mr. Prohartchin had certain incorrigible defects, or whether his
companions were, every one of them, to blame, there seemed to be
misunderstandings on both sides from the first. We must observe here
that all Ustinya Fyodorovna's new lodgers without exception got on
together like brothers; some of them were in the same office; each one
of them by turns lost all his money to the others at faro, preference
and _bixe_; they all liked in a merry hour to enjoy what they called the
fizzing moments of life in a crowd together; they were fond, too, at
times of discussing lofty subjects, and though in the end things rarely
passed off without a dispute, yet as all prejudices were banished from
the whole party the general harmony was not in the least disturbed
thereby. The most remarkable among the lodgers were Mark Ivanovitch, an
intelligent and well-read man; then Oplevaniev; then Prepolovenko, also
a nice and modest person; then there was a certain Zinovy Prokofyevitch,
whose object in life was to get into aristocratic society; then there
was Okeanov, the copying clerk, who had in his time almost wrested the
distinction of prime favourite from Semyon Ivanovitch; then another
copying clerk called Sudbin; the plebeian Kantarev; there were others
too. But to all these people Semyon Ivanovitch was, as it were, not one
of themselves. No one wished him harm, of course, for all had from the
very first done Prohartchin justice, and had decided in Mark
Ivanovitch's words that he, Prohartchin, was a good and harmless fellow,
though by no means a man of the world, trustworthy, and not a flatterer,
who had, of course, his failings; but that if he were sometimes unhappy
it was due to nothing else but lack of imagination. What is more, Mr.
Prohartchin, though deprived in this way of imagination, could never
have made a particularly favourable impression from his figure or
manners (upon which scoffers are fond of fastening), yet his figure did
not put people against him. Mark Ivanovitch, who was an intelligent
person, formally undertook Semyon Ivanovitch's defence, and declared in
rather happy and flowery language that Prohartchin was an elderly and
respectable man, who had long, long ago passed the age of romance. And
so, if Semyon Ivanovitch did not know how to get on with people, it must
have been entirely his own fault.

The first thing they noticed was the unmistakable parsimony and
niggardliness of Semyon Ivanovitch. That was at once observed and noted,
for Semyon Ivanovitch would never lend any one his teapot, even for a
moment; and that was the more unjust as he himself hardly ever drank
tea, but when he wanted anything drank, as a rule, rather a pleasant
decoction of wild flowers and certain medicinal herbs, of which he
always had a considerable store. His meals, too, were quite different
from the other lodgers'. He never, for instance, permitted himself to
partake of the whole dinner, provided daily by Ustinya Fyodorovna for
the other boarders. The dinner cost half a rouble; Semyon Ivanovitch
paid only twenty-five kopecks in copper, and never exceeded it, and so
took either a plate of soup with pie, or a plate of beef; most
frequently he ate neither soup nor beef, but he partook in moderation of
white bread with onion, curd, salted cucumber, or something similar,
which was a great deal cheaper, and he would only go back to his half
rouble dinner when he could stand it no longer....

Here the biographer confesses that nothing would have induced him to
allude to such realistic and low details, positively shocking and
offensive to some lovers of the heroic style, if it were not that these
details exhibit one peculiarity, one characteristic, in the hero of this
story; for Mr. Prohartchin was by no means so poor as to be unable to
have regular and sufficient meals, though he sometimes made out that he
was. But he acted as he did regardless of obloquy and people's
prejudices, simply to satisfy his strange whims, and from frugality and
excessive carefulness: all this, however, will be much clearer later on.
But we will beware of boring the reader with the description of all
Semyon Ivanovitch's whims, and will omit, for instance, the curious and
very amusing description of his attire; and, in fact, if it were not for
Ustinya Fyodorovna's own reference to it we should hardly have alluded
even to the fact that Semyon Ivanovitch never could make up his mind to
send his linen to the wash, or if he ever did so it was so rarely that
in the intervals one might have completely forgotten the existence of
linen on Semyon Ivanovitch. From the landlady's evidence it appeared
that "Semyon Ivanovitch, bless his soul, poor lamb, for twenty years had
been tucked away in his corner, without caring what folks thought, for
all the days of his life on earth he was a stranger to socks,
handkerchiefs, and all such things," and what is more, Ustinya
Fyodorovna had seen with her own eyes, thanks to the decrepitude of the
screen, that the poor dear man sometimes had had nothing to cover his
bare skin.

Such were the rumours in circulation after Semyon Ivanovitch's death.
But in his lifetime (and this was one of the most frequent occasions of
dissension) he could not endure it if any one, even somebody on friendly
terms with him, poked his inquisitive nose uninvited into his corner,
even through an aperture in the decrepit screen. He was a taciturn man
difficult to deal with and prone to ill health. He did not like people
to give him advice, he did not care for people who put themselves
forward either, and if any one jeered at him or gave him advice unasked,
he would fall foul of him at once, put him to shame, and settle his
business. "You are a puppy, you are a featherhead, you are not one to
give advice, so there--you mind your own business, sir. You'd better
count the stitches in your own socks, sir, so there!"

Semyon Ivanovitch was a plain man, and never used the formal mode of
address to any one. He could not bear it either when some one who knew
his little ways would begin from pure sport pestering him with
questions, such as what he had in his little trunk.... Semyon Ivanovitch
had one little trunk. It stood under his bed, and was guarded like the
apple of his eye; and though every one knew that there was nothing in it
except old rags, two or three pairs of damaged boots and all sorts of
rubbish, yet Mr. Prohartchin prized his property very highly, and they
used even to hear him at one time express dissatisfaction with his old,
but still sound, lock, and talk of getting a new one of a special German
pattern with a secret spring and various complications. When on one
occasion Zinovy Prokofyevitch, carried away by the thoughtlessness of
youth, gave expression to the very coarse and unseemly idea, that Semyon
Ivanovitch was probably hiding and treasuring something in his box to
leave to his descendants, every one who happened to be by was stupefied
at the extraordinary effects of Zinovy Prokofyevitch's sally. At first
Mr. Prohartchin could not find suitable terms for such a crude and
coarse idea. For a long time words dropped from his lips quite
incoherently, and it was only after a while they made out that Semyon
Ivanovitch was reproaching Zinovy Prokofyevitch for some shabby action
in the remote past; then they realized that Semyon Ivanovitch was
predicting that Zinovy Prokofyevitch would never get into aristocratic
society, and that the tailor to whom he owed a bill for his suits would
beat him--would certainly beat him--because the puppy had not paid him
for so long; and finally, "You puppy, you," Semyon Ivanovitch added,
"here you want to get into the hussars, but you won't, I tell you,
you'll make a fool of yourself. And I tell you what, you puppy, when
your superiors know all about it they will take and make you a copying
clerk; so that will be the end of it! Do you hear, puppy?" Then Semyon
Ivanovitch subsided, but after lying down for five hours, to the intense
astonishment of every one he seemed to have reached a decision, and
began suddenly reproaching and abusing the young man again, at first to
himself and afterwards addressing Zinovy Prokofyevitch. But the matter
did not end there, and in the evening, when Mark Ivanovitch and
Prepolovenko made tea and asked Okeanov to drink it with them, Semyon
Ivanovitch got up from his bed, purposely joined them, subscribing his
fifteen or twenty kopecks, and on the pretext of a sudden desire for a
cup of tea began at great length going into the subject, and explaining
that he was a poor man, nothing but a poor man, and that a poor man like
him had nothing to save. Mr. Prohartchin confessed that he was a poor
man on this occasion, he said, simply because the subject had come up;
that the day before yesterday he had meant to borrow a rouble from that
impudent fellow, but now he should not borrow it for fear the puppy
should brag, that that was the fact of the matter, and that his salary
was such that one could not buy enough to eat, and that finally, a poor
man, as you see, he sent his sister-in-law in Tver five roubles every
month, that if he did not send his sister-in-law in Tver five roubles
every month his sister-in-law would die, and if his sister-in-law, who
was dependent on him, were dead, he, Semyon Ivanovitch, would long ago
have bought himself a new suit.... And Semyon Ivanovitch went on talking
in this way at great length about being a poor man, about his
sister-in-law and about roubles, and kept repeating the same thing over
and over again to impress it on his audience till he got into a regular
muddle and relapsed into silence. Only three days later, when they had
all forgotten about him, and no one was thinking of attacking him, he
added something in conclusion to the effect that when Zinovy
Prokofyevitch went into the hussars the impudent fellow would have his
leg cut off in the war, and then he would come with a wooden leg and
say; "Semyon Ivanovitch, kind friend, give me something to eat!" and
then Semyon Ivanovitch would not give him something to eat, and would
not look at the insolent fellow; and that's how it would be, and he
could just make the best of it.

All this naturally seemed very curious and at the same time fearfully
amusing. Without much reflection, all the lodgers joined together for
further investigation, and simply from curiosity determined to make a
final onslaught on Semyon Ivanovitch _en masse_. And as Mr. Prohartchin,
too, had of late--that is, ever since he had begun living in the same
flat with them--been very fond of finding out everything about them and
asking inquisitive questions, probably for private reasons of his own,
relations sprang up between the opposed parties without any preparation
or effort on either side, as it were by chance and of itself. To get
into relations Semyon Ivanovitch always had in reserve his peculiar,
rather sly, and very ingenuous manoeuvre, of which the reader has
learned something already. He would get off his bed about tea-time, and
if he saw the others gathered together in a group to make tea he would
go up to them like a quiet, sensible, and friendly person, hand over his
twenty kopecks, as he was entitled to do, and announce that he wished to
join them. Then the young men would wink at one another, and so
indicating that they were in league together against Semyon Ivanovitch,
would begin a conversation, at first strictly proper and decorous. Then
one of the wittier of the party would, _à propos_ of nothing, fall to
telling them news consisting most usually of entirely false and quite
incredible details. He would say, for instance, that some one had heard
His Excellency that day telling Demid Vassilyevitch that in his opinion
married clerks were more trustworthy than unmarried, and more suitable
for promotion; for they were steady, and that their capacities were
considerably improved by marriage, and that therefore he--that is, the
speaker--in order to improve and be better fitted for promotion, was
doing his utmost to enter the bonds of matrimony as soon as possible
with a certain Fevronya Prokofyevna. Or he would say that it had more
than once been remarked about certain of his colleagues that they were
entirely devoid of social graces and of well-bred, agreeable manners,
and consequently unable to please ladies in good society, and that,
therefore, to eradicate this defect it would be suitable to deduct
something from their salary, and with the sum so obtained, to hire a
hall, where they could learn to dance, acquire the outward signs of
gentlemanliness and good-breeding, courtesy, respect for their seniors,
strength of will, a good and grateful heart and various agreeable
qualities. Or he would say that it was being arranged that some of the
clerks, beginning with the most elderly, were to be put through an
examination in all sorts of subjects to raise their standard of culture,
and in that way, the speaker would add, all sorts of things would come
to light, and certain gentlemen would have to lay their cards on the
table--in short, thousands of similar very absurd rumours were
discussed. To keep it up, every one believed the story at once, showed
interest in it, asked questions, applied it to themselves; and some of
them, assuming a despondent air, began shaking their heads and asking
every one's advice, saying what were they to do if they were to come
under it? It need hardly be said that a man far less credulous and
simple-hearted than Mr. Prohartchin would have been puzzled and carried
away by a rumour so unanimously believed. Moreover, from all
appearances, it might be safely concluded that Semyon Ivanovitch was
exceedingly stupid and slow to grasp any new unusual idea, and that when
he heard anything new, he had always first, as it were, to chew it over
and digest it, to find out the meaning, and struggling with it in
bewilderment, at last perhaps to overcome it, though even then in a
quite special manner peculiar to himself alone....

In this way curious and hitherto unexpected qualities began to show
themselves in Semyon Ivanovitch.... Talk and tittle-tattle followed, and
by devious ways it all reached the office at last, with additions. What
increased the sensation was the fact that Mr. Prohartchin, who had
looked almost exactly the same from time immemorial, suddenly, _à
propos_ of nothing, wore quite a different countenance. His face was
uneasy, his eyes were timid and had a scared and rather suspicious
expression. He took to walking softly, starting and listening, and to
put the finishing touch to his new characteristics developed a passion
for investigating the truth. He carried his love of truth at last to
such a pitch as to venture, on two occasions, to inquire of Demid
Vassilyevitch himself concerning the credibility of the strange rumours
that reached him daily by dozens, and if we say nothing here of the
consequence of the action of Semyon Ivanovitch, it is for no other
reason but a sensitive regard for his reputation. It was in this way
people came to consider him as misanthropic and regardless of the
proprieties. Then they began to discover that there was a great deal
that was fantastical about him, and in this they were not altogether
mistaken, for it was observed on more than one occasion that Semyon
Ivanovitch completely forgot himself, and sitting in his seat with his
mouth open and his pen in the air, as though frozen or petrified, looked
more like the shadow of a rational being than that rational being
itself. It sometimes happened that some innocently gaping gentleman, on
suddenly catching his straying, lustreless, questioning eyes, was scared
and all of a tremor, and at once inserted into some important document
either a smudge or some quite inappropriate word. The impropriety of
Semyon Ivanovitch's behaviour embarrassed and annoyed all really
well-bred people.... At last no one could feel any doubt of the
eccentricity of Semyon Ivanovitch's mind, when one fine morning the
rumour was all over the office that Mr. Prohartchin had actually
frightened Demid Vassilyevitch himself, for, meeting him in the
corridor, Semyon Ivanovitch had been so strange and peculiar that he had
forced his superior to beat a retreat.... The news of Semyon
Ivanovitch's behaviour reached him himself at last. Hearing of it he got
up at once, made his way carefully between the chairs and tables,
reached the entry, took down his overcoat with his own hand, put it on,
went out, and disappeared for an indefinite period. Whether he was led
into this by alarm or some other impulse we cannot say, but no trace was
seen of him for a time either at home or at the office....

We will not attribute Semyon Ivanovitch's fate simply to his
eccentricity, yet we must observe to the reader that our hero was a very
retiring man, unaccustomed to society, and had, until he made the
acquaintance of the new lodgers, lived in complete unbroken solitude,
and had been marked by his quietness and even a certain mysteriousness;
for he had spent all the time that he lodged at Peski lying on his bed
behind the screen, without talking or having any sort of relations with
any one. Both his old fellow-lodgers lived exactly as he did: they, too
were, somehow mysterious people and spent fifteen years lying behind
their screens. The happy, drowsy hours and days trailed by, one after
the other, in patriarchal stagnation, and as everything around them went
its way in the same happy fashion, neither Semyon Ivanovitch nor Ustinya
Fyodorovna could remember exactly when fate had brought them together.

"It may be ten years, it may be twenty, it may be even twenty-five
altogether," she would say at times to her new lodgers, "since he
settled with me, poor dear man, bless his heart!" And so it was very
natural that the hero of our story, being so unaccustomed to society was
disagreeably surprised when, a year before, he, a respectable and modest
man, had found himself, suddenly in the midst of a noisy and boisterous
crew, consisting of a dozen young fellows, his colleagues at the office,
and his new house-mates.

The disappearance of Semyon Ivanovitch made no little stir in the
lodgings. One thing was that he was the favourite; another, that his
passport, which had been in the landlady's keeping, appeared to have
been accidentally mislaid. Ustinya Fyodorovna raised a howl, as was her
invariable habit on all critical occasions. She spent two days in
abusing and upbraiding the lodgers. She wailed that they had chased away
her lodger like a chicken, and all those spiteful scoffers had been the
ruin of him; and on the third day she sent them all out to hunt for the
fugitive and at all costs to bring him back, dead or alive. Towards
evening Sudbin first came back with the news that traces had been
discovered, that he had himself seen the runaway in Tolkutchy Market and
other places, had followed and stood close to him, but had not dared to
speak to him; he had been near him in a crowd watching a house on fire
in Crooked Lane. Half an hour later Okeanov and Kantarev came in and
confirmed Sudbin's story, word for word; they, too, had stood near, had
followed him quite close, had stood not more than ten paces from him,
but they also had not ventured to speak to him, but both observed that
Semyon Ivanovitch was walking with a drunken cadger. The other lodgers
were all back and together at last, and after listening attentively they
made up their minds that Prohartchin could not be far off and would not
be long in returning; but they said that they had all known beforehand
that he was about with a drunken cadger. This drunken cadger was a
thoroughly bad lot, insolent and cringing, and it seemed evident that he
had got round Semyon Ivanovitch in some way. He had turned up just a
week before Semyon Ivanovitch's disappearance in company with Remnev,
had spent a little time in the flat telling them that he had suffered in
the cause of justice, that he had formerly been in the service in the
provinces, that an inspector had come down on them, that he and his
associates had somehow suffered in a good cause, that he had come to
Petersburg and fallen at the feet of Porfiry Grigoryevitch, that he had
been got, by interest, into a department; but through the cruel
persecution of fate he had been discharged from there too, and that
afterwards through reorganization the office itself had ceased to exist,
and that he had not been included in the new revised staff of clerks
owing as much to direct incapacity for official work as to capacity for
something else quite irrelevant--all this mixed up with his passion for
justice and of course the trickery of his enemies. After finishing his
story, in the course of which Mr. Zimoveykin more than once kissed his
sullen and unshaven friend Remnev, he bowed down to all in the room in
turn, not forgetting Avdotya the servant, called them all his
benefactors, and explained that he was an undeserving, troublesome,
mean, insolent and stupid man, and that good people must not be hard on
his pitiful plight and simplicity. After begging for their kind
protection Mr. Zimoveykin showed his livelier side, grew very cheerful,
kissed Ustinya Fyodorovna's hands, in spite of her modest protests that
her hand was coarse and not like a lady's; and towards evening promised
to show the company his talent in a remarkable character dance. But next
day his visit ended in a lamentable _dénouement_. Either because there
had been too much character in the character-dance, or because he had,
in Ustinya Fyodorovna's own words, somehow "insulted her and treated her
as no lady, though she was on friendly terms with Yaroslav Ilyitch
himself, and if she liked might long ago have been an officer's wife,"
Zimoveykin had to steer for home next day. He went away, came back
again, was again turned out with ignominy, then wormed his way into
Semyon Ivanovitch's good graces, robbed him incidentally of his new
breeches, and now it appeared he had led Semyon Ivanovitch astray.

As soon as the landlady knew that Semyon Ivanovitch was alive and well,
and that there was no need to hunt for his passport, she promptly left
off grieving and was pacified. Meanwhile some of the lodgers determined
to give the runaway a triumphal reception; they broke the bolt and moved
away the screen from Mr. Prohartchin's bed, rumpled up the bed a little,
took the famous box, put it at the foot of the bed; and on the bed laid
the sister-in-law, that is, a dummy made up of an old kerchief, a cap
and a mantle of the landlady's, such an exact counterfeit of a
sister-in-law that it might have been mistaken for one. Having finished
their work they waited for Semyon Ivanovitch to return, meaning to tell
him that his sister-in-law had arrived from the country and was there
behind his screen, poor thing! But they waited and waited.

Already, while they waited, Mark Ivanovitch had staked and lost half a
month's salary to Prepolovenko and Kantarev; already Okeanov's nose had
grown red and swollen playing "flips on the nose" and "three cards;"
already Avdotya the servant had almost had her sleep out and had twice
been on the point of getting up to fetch the wood and light the stove,
and Zinovy Prokofyevitch, who kept running out every minute to see
whether Semyon Ivanovitch were coming, was wet to the skin; but there
was no sign of any one yet--neither Semyon Ivanovitch nor the drunken
cadger. At last every one went to bed, leaving the sister-in-law behind
the screen in readiness for any emergency; and it was not till four
o'clock that a knock was heard at the gate, but when it did come it was
so loud that it quite made up to the expectant lodgers for all the
wearisome trouble they had been through. It was he--he himself--Semyon
Ivanovitch, Mr. Prohartchin, but in such a condition that they all cried
out in dismay, and no one thought about the sister-in-law. The lost man
was unconscious. He was brought in, or more correctly carried in, by a
sopping and tattered night-cabman. To the landlady's question where the
poor dear man had got so groggy, the cabman answered: "Why, he is not
drunk and has not had a drop, that I can tell you, for sure; but
seemingly a faintness has come over him, or some sort of a fit, or maybe
he's been knocked down by a blow."

They began examining him, propping the culprit against the stove to do
so more conveniently, and saw that it really was not a case of
drunkenness, nor had he had a blow, but that something else was wrong,
for Semyon Ivanovitch could not utter a word, but seemed twitching in a
sort of convulsion, and only blinked, fixing his eyes in bewilderment
first on one and then on another of the spectators, who were all attired
in night array. Then they began questioning the cabman, asking where he
had got him from. "Why, from folks out Kolomna way," he answered. "Deuce
knows what they are, not exactly gentry, but merry, rollicking
gentlemen; so he was like this when they gave him to me; whether they
had been fighting, or whether he was in some sort of a fit, goodness
knows what it was; but they were nice, jolly gentlemen!"

Semyon Ivanovitch was taken, lifted high on the shoulders of two or
three sturdy fellows, and carried to his bed. When Semyon Ivanovitch on
being put in bed felt the sister-in-law, and put his feet on his sacred
box, he cried out at the top of his voice, squatted up almost on his
heels, and trembling and shaking all over, with his hands and his body
he cleared a space as far as he could in his bed, while gazing with a
tremulous but strangely resolute look at those present, he seemed as it
were to protest that he would sooner die than give up the hundredth part
of his poor belongings to any one....

Semyon Ivanovitch lay for two or three days closely barricaded by the
screen, and so cut off from all the world and all its vain anxieties.
Next morning, of course, every one had forgotten about him; time,
meanwhile, flew by as usual, hour followed hour and day followed day.
The sick man's heavy, feverish brain was plunged in something between
sleep and delirium; but he lay quietly and did not moan or complain; on
the contrary he kept still and silent and controlled himself, lying low
in his bed, just as the hare lies close to the earth when it hears the
hunter. At times a long depressing stillness prevailed in the flat, a
sign that the lodgers had all gone to the office, and Semyon Ivanovitch,
waking up, could relieve his depression by listening to the bustle in
the kitchen, where the landlady was busy close by; or to the regular
flop of Avdotya's down-trodden slippers as, sighing and moaning, she
cleared away, rubbed and polished, tidying all the rooms in the flat.
Whole hours passed by in that way, drowsy, languid, sleepy, wearisome,
like the water that dripped with a regular sound from the locker into
the basin in the kitchen. At last the lodgers would arrive, one by one
or in groups, and Semyon Ivanovitch could very conveniently hear them
abusing the weather, saying they were hungry, making a noise, smoking,
quarrelling, and making friends, playing cards, and clattering the cups
as they got ready for tea. Semyon Ivanovitch mechanically made an effort
to get up and join them, as he had a right to do at tea; but he at once
sank back into drowsiness, and dreamed that he had been sitting a long
time at the tea-table, having tea with them and talking, and that Zinovy
Prokofyevitch had already seized the opportunity to introduce into the
conversation some scheme concerning sisters-in-law and the moral
relation of various worthy people to them. At this point Semyon
Ivanovitch was in haste to defend himself and reply. But the mighty
formula that flew from every tongue--"It has more than once been
observed"--cut short all his objections, and Semyon Ivanovitch could do
nothing better than begin dreaming again that to-day was the first of
the month and that he was receiving money in his office.

Undoing the paper round it on the stairs, he looked about him quickly,
and made haste as fast as he could to subtract half of the lawful wages
he had received and conceal it in his boot. Then on the spot, on the
stairs, quite regardless of the fact that he was in bed and asleep, he
made up his mind when he reached home to give his landlady what was due
for board and lodging; then to buy certain necessities, and to show any
one it might concern, as it were casually and unintentionally, that some
of his salary had been deducted, that now he had nothing left to send
his sister-in-law; then to speak with commiseration of his
sister-in-law, to say a great deal about her the next day and the day
after, and ten days later to say something casually again about her
poverty, that his companions might not forget. Making this determination
he observed that Andrey Efimovitch, that everlastingly silent, bald
little man who sat in the office three rooms from where Semyon
Ivanovitch sat, and hadn't said a word to him for twenty years, was
standing on the stairs, that he, too, was counting his silver roubles,
and shaking his head, he said to him: "Money!" "If there's no money
there will be no porridge," he added grimly as he went down the stairs,
and just at the door he ended: "And I have seven children, sir." Then
the little bald man, probably equally unconscious that he was acting as
a phantom and not as a substantial reality, held up his hand about
thirty inches from the floor, and waving it vertically, muttered that
the eldest was going to school, then glancing with indignation at Semyon
Ivanovitch, as though it were Mr. Prohartchin's fault that he was the
father of seven, pulled his old hat down over his eyes, and with a whisk
of his overcoat he turned to the left and disappeared. Semyon Ivanovitch
was quite frightened, and though he was fully convinced of his own
innocence in regard to the unpleasant accumulation of seven under one
roof, yet it seemed to appear that in fact no one else was to blame but
Semyon Ivanovitch. Panic-stricken he set off running, for it seemed to
him that the bald gentleman had turned back, was running after him, and
meant to search him and take away all his salary, insisting upon the
indisputable number seven, and resolutely denying any possible claim of
any sort of sisters-in-law upon Semyon Ivanovitch. Prohartchin ran and
ran, gasping for breath.... Beside him was running, too, an immense
number of people, and all of them were jingling their money in the
tailpockets of their skimpy little dress-coats; at last every one ran
up, there was the noise of fire engines, and whole masses of people
carried him almost on their shoulders up to that same house on fire
which he had watched last time in company with the drunken cadger. The
drunken cadger--alias Mr. Zimoveykin--was there now, too, he met Semyon
Ivanovitch, made a fearful fuss, took him by the arm, and led him into
the thickest part of the crowd. Just as then in reality, all about them
was the noise and uproar of an immense crowd of people, flooding the
whole of Fontanka Embankment between the two bridges, as well as all the
surrounding streets and alleys; just as then, Semyon Ivanovitch, in
company with the drunken cadger, was carried along behind a fence, where
they were squeezed as though in pincers in a huge timber-yard full of
spectators who had gathered from the street, from Tolkutchy Market and
from all the surrounding houses, taverns, and restaurants. Semyon
Ivanovitch saw all this and felt as he had done at the time; in the
whirl of fever and delirium all sorts of strange figures began flitting
before him. He remembered some of them. One of them was a gentleman who
had impressed every one extremely, a man seven feet high, with whiskers
half a yard long, who had been standing behind Semyon Ivanovitch's back
during the fire, and had given him encouragement from behind, when our
hero had felt something like ecstasy and had stamped as though intending
thereby to applaud the gallant work of the firemen, from which he had an
excellent view from his elevated position. Another was the sturdy lad
from whom our hero had received a shove by way of a lift on to another
fence, when he had been disposed to climb over it, possibly to save some
one. He had a glimpse, too, of the figure of the old man with a sickly
face, in an old wadded dressing-gown, tied round the waist, who had made
his appearance before the fire in a little shop buying sugar and tobacco
for his lodger, and who now, with a milk-can and a quart pot in his
hands, made his way through the crowd to the house in which his wife and
daughter were burning together with thirteen and a half roubles in the
corner under the bed. But most distinct of all was the poor, sinful
woman of whom he had dreamed more than once during his illness--she
stood before him now as she had done then, in wretched bark shoes and
rags, with a crutch and a wicker-basket on her back. She was shouting
more loudly than the firemen or the crowd, waving her crutch and her
arms, saying that her own children had turned her out and that she had
lost two coppers in consequence. The children and the coppers, the
coppers and the children, were mingled together in an utterly
incomprehensible muddle, from which every one withdrew baffled, after
vain efforts to understand. But the woman would not desist, she kept
wailing, shouting, and waving her arms, seeming to pay no attention
either to the fire up to which she had been carried by the crowd from
the street or to the people about her, or to the misfortune of
strangers, or even to the sparks and red-hot embers which were beginning
to fall in showers on the crowd standing near. At last Mr. Prohartchin
felt that a feeling of terror was coming upon him; for he saw clearly
that all this was not, so to say, an accident, and that he would not get
off scot-free. And, indeed, upon the woodstack, close to him, was a
peasant, in a torn smock that hung loose about him, with his hair and
beard singed, and he began stirring up all the people against Semyon
Ivanovitch. The crowd pressed closer and closer, the peasant shouted,
and foaming at the mouth with horror, Mr. Prohartchin suddenly realized
that this peasant was a cabman whom he had cheated five years before in
the most inhuman way, slipping away from him without paying through a
side gate and jerking up his heels as he ran as though he were barefoot
on hot bricks. In despair Mr. Prohartchin tried to speak, to scream, but
his voice failed him. He felt that the infuriated crowd was twining
round him like a many-coloured snake, strangling him, crushing him. He
made an incredible effort and awoke. Then he saw that he was on fire,
that all his corner was on fire, that his screen was on fire, that the
whole flat was on fire, together with Ustinya Fyodorovna and all her
lodgers, that his bed was burning, his pillow, his quilt, his box, and
last of all, his precious mattress. Semyon Ivanovitch jumped up,
clutched at the mattress and ran dragging it after him. But in the
landlady's room into which, regardless of decorum, our hero ran just as
he was, barefoot and in his shirt, he was seized, held tight, and
triumphantly carried back behind the screen, which meanwhile was not on
fire--it seemed that it was rather Semyon Ivanovitch's head that was on
fire--and was put back to bed. It was just as some tattered, unshaven,
ill-humoured organ-grinder puts away in his travelling box the Punch who
has been making an upset, drubbing all the other puppets, selling his
soul to the devil, and who at last ends his existence, till the next
performance, in the same box with the devil, the negroes, the Pierrot,
and Mademoiselle Katerina with her fortunate lover, the captain.

Immediately every one, old and young, surrounded Semyon Ivanovitch,
standing in a row round his bed and fastening eyes full of expectation
on the invalid. Meantime he had come to himself, but from shame or some
other feeling, began pulling up the quilt over him, apparently wishing
to hide himself under it from the attention of his sympathetic friends.
At last Mark Ivanovitch was the first to break silence, and as a
sensible man he began saying in a very friendly way that Semyon
Ivanovitch must keep calm, that it was too bad and a shame to be ill,
that only little children behaved like that, that he must get well and
go to the office. Mark Ivanovitch ended by a little joke, saying that no
regular salary had yet been fixed for invalids, and as he knew for a
fact that their grade would be very low in the service, to his thinking
anyway, their calling or condition did not promise great and substantial
advantages. In fact, it was evident that they were all taking genuine
interest in Semyon Ivanovitch's fate and were very sympathetic. But with
incomprehensible rudeness, Semyon Ivanovitch persisted in lying in bed
in silence, and obstinately pulling the quilt higher and higher over his
head. Mark Ivanovitch, however, would not be gainsaid, and restraining
his feelings, said something very honeyed to Semyon Ivanovitch again,
knowing that that was how he ought to treat a sick man. But Semyon
Ivanovitch would not feel this: on the contrary he muttered something
between his teeth with the most distrustful air, and suddenly began
glancing askance from right to left in a hostile way, as though he would
have reduced his sympathetic friends to ashes with his eyes. It was no
use letting it stop there. Mark Ivanovitch lost patience, and seeing
that the man was offended and completely exasperated, and had simply
made up his mind to be obstinate, told him straight out, without any
softening suavity, that it was time to get up, that it was no use lying
there, that shouting day and night about houses on fire, sisters-in-law,
drunken cadgers, locks, boxes and goodness knows what, was all stupid,
improper, and degrading, for if Semyon Ivanovitch did not want to sleep
himself he should not hinder other people, and please would he bear it
in mind.

This speech produced its effects, for Semyon Ivanovitch, turning
promptly to the orator, articulated firmly, though in a hoarse voice,
"You hold your tongue, puppy! You idle speaker, you foul-mouthed man! Do
you hear, young dandy? Are you a prince, eh? Do you understand what I
say?"

Hearing such insults, Mark Ivanovitch fired up, but realizing that he
had to deal with a sick man, magnanimously overcame his resentment and
tried to shame him out of his humour, but was cut short in that too; for
Semyon Ivanovitch observed at once that he would not allow people to
play with him for all that Mark Ivanovitch wrote poetry. Then followed a
silence of two minutes; at last recovering from his amazement Mark
Ivanovitch, plainly, clearly, in well-chosen language, but with
firmness, declared that Semyon Ivanovitch ought to understand that he
was among gentlemen, and "you ought to understand, sir, how to behave
with gentlemen."

Mark Ivanovitch could on occasion speak effectively and liked to impress
his hearers, but, probably from the habit of years of silence, Semyon
Ivanovitch talked and acted somewhat abruptly; and, moreover, when he
did on occasion begin a long sentence, as he got further into it every
word seemed to lead to another word, that other word to a third word,
that third to a fourth and so on, so that his mouth seemed brimming
over; he began stuttering, and the crowding words took to flying out in
picturesque disorder. That was why Semyon Ivanovitch, who was a sensible
man, sometimes talked terrible nonsense. "You are lying," he said now.
"You booby, you loose fellow! You'll come to want--you'll go begging,
you seditious fellow, you--you loafer. Take that, you poet!"

"Why, you are still raving, aren't you, Semyon Ivanovitch?"

"I tell you what," answered Semyon Ivanovitch, "fools rave, drunkards
rave, dogs rave, but a wise man acts sensibly. I tell you, you don't
know your own business, you loafer, you educated gentleman, you learned
book! Here, you'll get on fire and not notice your head's burning off.
What do you think of that?"

"Why ... you mean.... How do you mean, burn my head off, Semyon
Ivanovitch?"

Mark Ivanovitch said no more, for every one saw clearly that Semyon
Ivanovitch was not yet in his sober senses, but delirious.

But the landlady could not resist remarking at this point that the house
in Crooked Lane had been burnt owing to a bald wench; that there was a
bald-headed wench living there, that she had lighted a candle and set
fire to the lumber room; but nothing would happen in her place, and
everything would be all right in the flats.

"But look here, Semyon Ivanovitch," cried Zinovy Prokofyevitch, losing
patience and interrupting the landlady, "you old fogey, you old crock,
you silly fellow--are they making jokes with you now about your
sister-in-law or examinations in dancing? Is that it? Is that what you
think?"

"Now, I tell you what," answered our hero, sitting up in bed and making
a last effort in a paroxysm of fury with his sympathetic friends. "Who's
the fool? You are the fool, a dog is a fool, you joking gentleman. But I
am not going to make jokes to please you, sir; do you hear, puppy? I am
not your servant, sir."

Semyon Ivanovitch would have said something more, but he fell back in
bed helpless. His sympathetic friends were left gaping in perplexity,
for they understood now what was wrong with Semyon Ivanovitch and did
not know how to begin. Suddenly the kitchen door creaked and opened, and
the drunken cadger--alias Mr. Zimoveykin--timidly thrust in his head,
cautiously sniffing round the place as his habit was. It seemed as
though he had been expected, every one waved to him at once to come
quickly, and Zimoveykin, highly delighted, with the utmost readiness and
haste jostled his way to Semyon Ivanovitch's bedside.

It was evident that Zimoveykin had spent the whole night in vigil and in
great exertions of some sort. The right side of his face was plastered
up; his swollen eyelids were wet from his running eyes, his coat and all
his clothes were torn, while the whole left side of his attire was
bespattered with something extremely nasty, possibly mud from a puddle.
Under his arm was somebody's violin, which he had been taking somewhere
to sell. Apparently they had not made a mistake in summoning him to
their assistance, for seeing the position of affairs, he addressed the
delinquent at once, and with the air of a man who knows what he is about
and feels that he has the upper hand, said: "What are you thinking
about? Get up, Senka. What are you doing, a clever chap like you? Be
sensible, or I shall pull you out of bed if you are obstreperous. Don't
be obstreperous!"

This brief but forcible speech surprised them all; still more were they
surprised when they noticed that Semyon Ivanovitch, hearing all this and
seeing this person before him, was so flustered and reduced to such
confusion and dismay that he could scarcely mutter through his teeth in
a whisper the inevitable protest.

"Go away, you wretch," he said. "You are a wretched creature--you are a
thief! Do you hear? Do you understand? You are a great swell, my fine
gentleman, you regular swell."

"No, my boy," Zimoveykin answered emphatically, retaining all his
presence of mind, "you're wrong there, you wise fellow, you regular
Prohartchin," Zimoveykin went on, parodying Semyon Ivanovitch and
looking round gleefully. "Don't be obstreperous! Behave yourself, Senka,
behave yourself, or I'll give you away, I'll tell them all about it, my
lad, do you understand?"

Apparently Semyon Ivanovitch did understand, for he started when he
heard the conclusion of the speech, and began looking rapidly about him
with an utterly desperate air.

Satisfied with the effect, Mr. Zimoveykin would have continued, but Mark
Ivanovitch checked his zeal, and waiting till Semyon Ivanovitch was
still and almost calm again began judiciously impressing on the uneasy
invalid at great length that, "to harbour ideas such as he now had in
his head was, first, useless, and secondly, not only useless, but
harmful; and, in fact, not so much harmful as positively immoral; and
the cause of it all was that Semyon Ivanovitch was not only a bad
example, but led them all into temptation."

Every one expected satisfactory results from this speech. Moreover by
now Semyon Ivanovitch was quite quiet and replied in measured terms. A
quiet discussion followed. They appealed to him in a friendly way,
inquiring what he was so frightened of. Semyon Ivanovitch answered, but
his answers were irrelevant. They answered him, he answered them. There
were one or two more observations on both sides and then every one
rushed into discussion, for suddenly such a strange and amazing subject
cropped up, that they did not know how to express themselves. The
argument at last led to impatience, impatience led to shouting, and
shouting even to tears; and Mark Ivanovitch went away at last foaming at
the mouth and declaring that he had never known such a blockhead.
Oplevaniev spat in disgust, Okeanov was frightened, Zinovy Prokofyevitch
became tearful, while Ustinya Fyodorovna positively howled, wailing that
her lodger was leaving them and had gone off his head, that he would
die, poor dear man, without a passport and without telling any one,
while she was a lone, lorn woman and that she would be dragged from
pillar to post. In fact, they all saw clearly at last that the seed they
had sown had yielded a hundred-fold, that the soil had been too
productive, and that in their company, Semyon Ivanovitch had succeeded
in overstraining his wits completely and in the most irrevocable manner.
Every one subsided into silence, for though they saw that Semyon
Ivanovitch was frightened, the sympathetic friends were frightened too.

"What?" cried Mark Ivanovitch; "but what are you afraid of? What have
you gone off your head about? Who's thinking about you, my good sir?
Have you the right to be afraid? Who are you? What are you? Nothing,
sir. A round nought, sir, that is what you are. What are you making a
fuss about? A woman has been run over in the street, so are you going to
be run over? Some drunkard did not take care of his pocket, but is that
any reason why your coat-tails should be cut off? A house is burnt down,
so your head is to be burnt off, is it? Is that it, sir, is that it?"

"You ... you ... you stupid!" muttered Semyon Ivanovitch, "if your nose
were cut off you would eat it up with a bit of bread and not notice it."

"I may be a dandy," shouted Mark Ivanovitch, not listening; "I may be a
regular dandy, but I have not to pass an examination to get married--to
learn dancing; the ground is firm under me, sir. Why, my good man,
haven't you room enough? Is the floor giving way under your feet, or
what?"

"Well, they won't ask you, will they? They'll shut one up and that will
be the end of it?"

"The end of it? That's what's up? What's your idea now, eh?"

"Why, they kicked out the drunken cadger."

"Yes; but you see that was a drunkard, and you are a man, and so am I."

"Yes, I am a man. It's there all right one day and then it's gone."

"Gone! But what do you mean by it?"

"Why, the office! The off--off--ice!"

"Yes, you blessed man, but of course the office is wanted and
necessary."

"It is wanted, I tell you; it's wanted to-day and it's wanted to-morrow,
but the day after to-morrow it will not be wanted. You have heard what
happened?"

"Why, but they'll pay you your salary for the year, you doubting Thomas,
you man of little faith. They'll put you into another job on account of
your age."

"Salary? But what if I have spent my salary, if thieves come and take my
money? And I have a sister-in-law, do you hear? A sister-in-law! You
battering-ram...."

"A sister-in-law! You are a man...."

"Yes, I am; I am a man. But you are a well-read gentleman and a fool, do
you hear?--you battering-ram--you regular battering-ram! That's what you
are! I am not talking about your jokes; but there are jobs such that all
of a sudden they are done away with. And Demid--do you hear?--Demid
Vassilyevitch says that the post will be done away with...."

"Ah, bless you, with your Demid! You sinner, why, you know...."

"In a twinkling of an eye you'll be left without a post, then you'll
just have to make the best of it."

"Why, you are simply raving, or clean off your head! Tell us plainly,
what have you done? Own up if you have done something wrong! It's no use
being ashamed! Are you off your head, my good man, eh?"

"He's off his head! He's gone off his head!" they all cried, and wrung
their hands in despair, while the landlady threw both her arms round
Mark Ivanovitch for fear he should tear Semyon Ivanovitch to pieces.

"You heathen, you heathenish soul, you wise man!" Zimoveykin besought
him. "Senka, you are not a man to take offence, you are a polite,
prepossessing man. You are simple, you are good ... do you hear? It all
comes from your goodness. Here I am a ruffian and a fool, I am a beggar;
but good people haven't abandoned me, no fear; you see they treat me
with respect, I thank them and the landlady. Here, you see, I bow down
to the ground to them; here, see, see, I am paying what is due to you,
landlady!" At this point Zimoveykin swung off with pedantic dignity a
low bow right down to the ground.

After that Semyon Ivanovitch would have gone on talking; but this time
they would not let him, they all intervened, began entreating him,
assuring him, comforting him, and succeeded in making Semyon Ivanovitch
thoroughly ashamed of himself, and at last, in a faint voice, he asked
leave to explain himself.

"Very well, then," he said, "I am prepossessing, I am quiet, I am good,
faithful and devoted; to the last drop of my blood you know ... do you
hear, you puppy, you swell? ... granted the job is going on, but you see
I am poor. And what if they take it? do you hear, you swell? Hold your
tongue and try to understand! They'll take it and that's all about it
... it's going on, brother, and then not going on ... do you understand?
And I shall go begging my bread, do you hear?"

"Senka," Zimoveykin bawled frantically, drowning the general hubbub with
his voice. "You are seditious! I'll inform against you! What are you
saying? Who are you? Are you a rebel, you sheep's head? A rowdy, stupid
man they would turn off without a character. But what are you?"

"Well, that's just it."

"What?"

"Well, there it is."

"How do you mean?"

"Why, I am free, he's free, and here one lies and thinks...."

"What?"

"What if they say I'm seditious?"

"Se--di--tious? Senka, you seditious!"

"Stay," cried Mr. Prohartchin, waving his hand and interrupting the
rising uproar, "that's not what I mean. Try to understand, only try to
understand, you sheep. I am law-abiding. I am law-abiding to-day, I am
law-abiding to-morrow, and then all of a sudden they kick me out and
call me seditious."

"What are you saying?" Mark Ivanovitch thundered at last, jumping up
from the chair on which he had sat down to rest, running up to the bed
and in a frenzy shaking with vexation and fury. "What do you mean? You
sheep! You've nothing to call your own. Why, are you the only person in
the world? Was the world made for you, do you suppose? Are you a
Napoleon? What are you? Who are you? Are you a Napoleon, eh? Tell me,
are you a Napoleon?"

But Mr. Prohartchin did not answer this question. Not because he was
overcome with shame at being a Napoleon, and was afraid of taking upon
himself such a responsibility--no, he was incapable of disputing
further, or saying anything.... His illness had reached a crisis. Tiny
teardrops gushed suddenly from his glittering, feverish, grey eyes. He
hid his burning head in his bony hands that were wasted by illness, sat
up in bed, and sobbing, began to say that he was quite poor, that he was
a simple, unlucky man, that he was foolish and unlearned, he begged kind
folks to forgive him, to take care of him, to protect him, to give him
food and drink, not to leave him in want, and goodness knows what else
Semyon Ivanovitch said. As he uttered this appeal he looked about him in
wild terror, as though he were expecting the ceiling to fall or the
floor to give way. Every one felt his heart soften and move to pity as
he looked at the poor fellow. The landlady, sobbing and wailing like a
peasant woman at her forlorn condition, laid the invalid back in bed
with her own hands. Mark Ivanovitch, seeing the uselessness of touching
upon the memory of Napoleon, instantly relapsed into kindliness and came
to her assistance. The others, in order to do something, suggested
raspberry tea, saying that it always did good at once and that the
invalid would like it very much; but Zimoveykin contradicted them all,
saying there was nothing better than a good dose of camomile or
something of the sort. As for Zinovy Prokofyevitch, having a good heart,
he sobbed and shed tears in his remorse, for having frightened Semyon
Ivanovitch with all sorts of absurdities, and gathering from the
invalid's last words that he was quite poor and needing assistance, he
proceeded to get up a subscription for him, confining it for a time to
the tenants of the flat. Every one was sighing and moaning, every one
felt sorry and grieved, and yet all wondered how it was a man could be
so completely panic-stricken. And what was he frightened about? It would
have been all very well if he had had a good post, had had a wife, a lot
of children; it would have been excusable if he were being hauled up
before the court on some charge or other; but he was a man utterly
insignificant, with nothing but a trunk and a German lock; he had been
lying more than twenty years behind his screen, saying nothing, knowing
nothing of the world nor of trouble, saving his half-pence, and now at a
frivolous, idle word the man had actually gone off his head, was utterly
panic-stricken at the thought he might have a hard time of it.... And it
never occurred to him that every one has a hard time of it! "If he would
only take that into consideration," Okeanov said afterwards, "that we
all have a hard time, then the man would have kept his head, would have
given up his antics and would have put up with things, one way or
another."

All day long nothing was talked of but Semyon Ivanovitch. They went up
to him, inquired after him, tried to comfort him; but by the evening he
was beyond that. The poor fellow began to be delirious, feverish. He
sank into unconsciousness, so that they almost thought of sending for a
doctor; the lodgers all agreed together and undertook to watch over
Semyon Ivanovitch and soothe him by turns through the night, and if
anything happened to wake all the rest immediately. With the object of
keeping awake, they sat down to cards, setting beside the invalid his
friend, the drunken cadger, who had spent the whole day in the flat and
had asked leave to stay the night. As the game was played on credit and
was not at all interesting they soon got bored. They gave up the game,
then got into an argument about something, then began to be loud and
noisy, finally dispersed to their various corners, went on for a long
time angrily shouting and wrangling, and as all of them felt suddenly
ill-humoured they no longer cared to sit up, so went to sleep. Soon it
was as still in the flat as in an empty cellar, and it was the more like
one because it was horribly cold. The last to fall asleep was Okeanov.
"And it was between sleeping and waking," as he said afterwards, "I
fancied just before morning two men kept talking close by me." Okeanov
said that he recognized Zimoveykin, and that Zimoveykin began waking his
old friend Remnev just beside him, that they talked for a long time in a
whisper; then Zimoveykin went away and could be heard trying to unlock
the door into the kitchen. The key, the landlady declared afterwards,
was lying under her pillow and was lost that night. Finally--Okeanov
testified--he had fancied he had heard them go behind the screen to the
invalid and light a candle there, "and I know nothing more," he said, "I
fell asleep, and woke up," as everybody else did, when every one in the
flat jumped out of bed at the sound behind the screen of a shriek that
would have roused the dead, and it seemed to many of them that a candle
went out at that moment. A great hubbub arose, every one's heart stood
still; they rushed pell-mell at the shriek, but at that moment there was
a scuffle, with shouting, swearing, and fighting. They struck a light
and saw that Zimoveykin and Remnev were fighting together, that they
were swearing and abusing one another, and as they turned the light on
them, one of them shouted: "It's not me, it's this ruffian," and the
other who was Zimoveykin, was shouting: "Don't touch me, I've done
nothing! I'll take my oath any minute!" Both of them looked hardly like
human beings; but for the first minute they had no attention to spare
for them; the invalid was not where he had been behind the screen. They
immediately parted the combatants and dragged them away, and saw that
Mr. Prohartchin was lying under the bed; he must, while completely
unconscious, have dragged the quilt and pillow after him so that there
was nothing left on the bedstead but the bare mattress, old and greasy
(he never had sheets). They pulled Semyon Ivanovitch out, stretched him
on the mattress, but soon realized that there was no need to make
trouble over him, that he was completely done for; his arms were stiff,
and he seemed all to pieces. They stood over him, he still faintly
shuddered and trembled all over, made an effort to do something with his
arms, could not utter a word, but blinked his eyes as they say heads do
when still warm and bleeding, after being just chopped off by the
executioner.

At last the body grew more and more still; the last faint convulsions
died away. Mr. Prohartchin had set off with his good deeds and his sins.
Whether Semyon Ivanovitch had been frightened by something, whether he
had had a dream, as Remnev maintained afterwards, or there had been some
other mischief--nobody knew; all that can be said is, that if the head
clerk had made his appearance at that moment in the flat and had
announced that Semyon Ivanovitch was dismissed for sedition,
insubordination, and drunkenness; if some old draggle-tailed beggar
woman had come in at the door, calling herself Semyon Ivanovitch's
sister-in-law; or if Semyon Ivanovitch had just received two hundred
roubles as a reward; or if the house had caught fire and Semyon
Ivanovitch's head had been really burning--he would in all probability
not have deigned to stir a finger in any of these eventualities. While
the first stupefaction was passing over, while all present were
regaining their powers of speech, were working themselves up into a
fever of excitement, shouting and flying to conjectures and
suppositions; while Ustinya Fyodorovna was pulling the box from under
his bed, was rummaging in a fluster under the mattress and even in
Semyon Ivanovitch's boots; while they cross-questioned Remnev and
Zimoveykin, Okeanov, who had hitherto been the quietest, humblest, and
least original of the lodgers, suddenly plucked up all his presence of
mind and displayed all his latent talents, by taking up his hat and
under cover of the general uproar slipping out of the flat. And just
when the horrors of disorder and anarchy had reached their height in the
agitated flat, till then so tranquil, the door opened and suddenly there
descended upon them, like snow upon their heads, a personage of
gentlemanly appearance, with a severe and displeased-looking face,
behind him Yaroslav Ilyitch, behind Yaroslav Ilyitch his subordinates
and the functionaries whose duty it is to be present on such occasions,
and behind them all, much embarrassed, Mr. Okeanov. The severe-looking
personage of gentlemanly appearance went straight up to Semyon
Ivanovitch, examined him, made a wry face, shrugged his shoulders and
announced what everybody knew, that is, that the dead man was dead, only
adding that the same thing had happened a day or two ago to a gentleman
of consequence, highly respected, who had died suddenly in his sleep.
Then the personage of gentlemanly, but displeased-looking, appearance
walked away saying that they had troubled him for nothing, and took
himself off. His place was at once filled (while Remnev and Zimoveykin
were handed over to the custody of the proper functionaries), by
Yaroslav Ilyitch, who questioned some one, adroitly took possession of
the box, which the landlady was already trying to open, put the boots
back in their proper place, observing that they were all in holes and no
use, asked for the pillow to be put back, called up Okeanov, asked for
the key of the box which was found in the pocket of the drunken cadger,
and solemnly, in the presence of the proper officials, unlocked Semyon
Ivanovitch's property. Everything was displayed: two rags, a pair of
socks, half a handkerchief, an old hat, several buttons, some old soles,
and the uppers of a pair of boots, that is, all sorts of odds and ends,
scraps, rubbish, trash, which had a stale smell. The only thing of any
value was the German lock. They called up Okeanov and cross-questioned
him sternly; but Okeanov was ready to take his oath. They asked for the
pillow, they examined it; it was extremely dirty, but in other respects
it was like all other pillows. They attacked the mattress, they were
about to lift it up, but stopped for a moment's consideration, when
suddenly and quite unexpectedly something heavy fell with a clink on the
floor. They bent down and saw on the floor a screw of paper and in the
screw some dozen roubles. "A-hey!" said Yaroslav Ilyitch, pointing to a
slit in the mattress from which hair and stuffing were sticking out.
They examined the slit and found that it had only just been made with a
knife and was half a yard in length; they thrust hands into the gap and
pulled out a kitchen knife, probably hurriedly thrust in there after
slitting the mattress. Before Yaroslav Ilyitch had time to pull the
knife out of the slit and to say "A-hey!" again, another screw of money
fell out, and after it, one at a time, two half roubles, a quarter
rouble, then some small change, and an old-fashioned, solid five-kopeck
piece--all this was seized upon. At this point it was realized that it
would not be amiss to cut up the whole mattress with scissors. They
asked for scissors.

Meanwhile, the guttering candle lighted up a scene that would have been
extremely curious to a spectator. About a dozen lodgers were grouped
round the bed in the most picturesque costumes, all unbrushed, unshaven,
unwashed, sleepy-looking, just as they had gone to bed. Some were quite
pale, while others had drops of sweat upon their brows: some were
shuddering, while others looked feverish. The landlady, utterly
stupefied, was standing quietly with her hands folded waiting for
Yaroslav Ilyitch's good pleasure. From the stove above, the heads of
Avdotya, the servant, and the landlady's favourite cat looked down with
frightened curiosity. The torn and broken screen lay cast on the floor,
the open box displayed its uninviting contents, the quilt and pillow lay
tossed at random, covered with fluff from the mattress, and on the
three-legged wooden table gleamed the steadily growing heap of silver
and other coins. Only Semyon Ivanovitch preserved his composure, lying
calmly on the bed and seeming to have no foreboding of his ruin. When
the scissors had been brought and Yaroslav Ilyitch's assistant, wishing
to be of service, shook the mattress rather impatiently to ease it from
under the back of its owner, Semyon Ivanovitch with his habitual
civility made room a little, rolling on his side with his back to the
searchers; then at a second shake he turned on his face, finally gave
way still further, and as the last slat in the bedstead was missing, he
suddenly and quite unexpectedly plunged head downward, leaving in view
only two bony, thin, blue legs, which stuck upwards like two branches of
a charred tree. As this was the second time that morning that Mr.
Prohartchin had poked his head under his bed it at once aroused
suspicion, and some of the lodgers, headed by Zinovy Prokofyevitch,
crept under it, with the intention of seeing whether there were
something hidden there too. But they knocked their heads together for
nothing, and as Yaroslav Ilyitch shouted to them, bidding them release
Semyon Ivanovitch at once from his unpleasant position, two of the more
sensible seized each a leg, dragged the unsuspected capitalist into the
light of day and laid him across the bed. Meanwhile the hair and flock
were flying about, the heap of silver grew--and, my goodness, what a lot
there was!... Noble silver roubles, stout solid rouble and a half
pieces, pretty half rouble coins, plebeian quarter roubles, twenty
kopeck pieces, even the unpromising old crone's small fry of ten and
five kopeck silver pieces--all done up in separate bits of paper in the
most methodical and systematic way; there were curiosities also, two
counters of some sort, one napoléon d'or, one very rare coin of some
unknown kind.... Some of the roubles were of the greatest antiquity,
they were rubbed and hacked coins of Elizabeth, German kreutzers, coins
of Peter, of Catherine; there were, for instance, old fifteen-kopeck
pieces, now very rare, pierced for wearing as earrings, all much worn,
yet with the requisite number of dots ... there was even copper, but all
of that was green and tarnished.... They found one red note, but no
more. At last, when the dissection was quite over and the mattress case
had been shaken more than once without a clink, they piled all the money
on the table and set to work to count it. At the first glance one might
well have been deceived and have estimated it at a million, it was such
an immense heap. But it was not a million, though it did turn out to be
a very considerable sum--exactly 2497 roubles and a half--so that if
Zinovy Prokofyevitch's subscription had been raised the day before there
would perhaps have been just 2500 roubles. They took the money, they put
a seal on the dead man's box, they listened to the landlady's
complaints, and informed her when and where she ought to lodge
information in regard to the dead man's little debt to her. A receipt
was taken from the proper person. At that point hints were dropped in
regard to the sister-in-law; but being persuaded that in a certain sense
the sister-in-law was a myth, that is, a product of the defective
imagination with which they had more than once reproached Semyon
Ivanovitch--they abandoned the idea as useless, mischievous and
disadvantageous to the good name of Mr. Prohartchin, and so the matter
ended.

When the first shock was over, when the lodgers had recovered themselves
and realized the sort of person their late companion had been, they all
subsided, relapsed into silence and began looking distrustfully at one
another. Some seemed to take Semyon Ivanovitch's behaviour very much to
heart, and even to feel affronted by it. What a fortune! So the man had
saved up like this! Not losing his composure, Mark Ivanovitch proceeded
to explain why Semyon Ivanovitch had been so suddenly panic-stricken;
but they did not listen to him. Zinovy Prokofyevitch was very
thoughtful, Okeanov had had a little to drink, the others seemed rather
crestfallen, while a little man called Kantarev, with a nose like a
sparrow's beak, left the flat that evening after very carefully packing
up and cording all his boxes and bags, and coldly explaining to the
curious that times were hard and that the terms here were beyond his
means. The landlady wailed without ceasing, lamenting for Semyon
Ivanovitch, and cursing him for having taken advantage of her lone, lorn
state. Mark Ivanovitch was asked why the dead man had not taken his
money to the bank. "He was too simple, my good soul, he hadn't enough
imagination," answered Mark Ivanovitch.

"Yes, and you have been too simple, too, my good woman," Okeanov put in.
"For twenty years the man kept himself close here in your flat, and here
he's been knocked down by a feather--while you went on cooking
cabbage-soup and had no time to notice it.... Ah-ah, my good woman!"

"Oh, the poor dear," the landlady went on, "what need of a bank! If he'd
brought me his pile and said to me: 'Take it, Ustinyushka, poor dear,
here is all I have, keep and board me in my helplessness, so long as I
am on earth,' then, by the holy ikon I would have fed him, I would have
given him drink, I would have looked after him. Ah, the sinner! ah, the
deceiver! He deceived me, he cheated me, a poor lone woman!"

They went up to the bed again. Semyon Ivanovitch was lying properly now,
dressed in his best, though, indeed, it was his only suit, hiding his
rigid chin behind a cravat which was tied rather awkwardly, washed,
brushed, but not quite shaven, because there was no razor in the flat;
the only one, which had belonged to Zinovy Prokofyevitch, had lost its
edge a year ago and had been very profitably sold at Tolkutchy Market;
the others used to go to the barber's.

They had not yet had time to clear up the disorder. The broken screen
lay as before, and exposing Semyon Ivanovitch's seclusion, seemed like
an emblem of the fact that death tears away the veil from all our
secrets, our shifty dodges and intrigues. The stuffing from the mattress
lay about in heaps. The whole room, suddenly so still, might well have
been compared by a poet to the ruined nest of a swallow, broken down and
torn to pieces by the storm, the nestlings and their mother killed, and
their warm little bed of fluff, feather and flock scattered about
them.... Semyon Ivanovitch, however, looked more like a conceited,
thievish old cock-sparrow. He kept quite quiet now, seemed to be lying
low, as though he were not guilty, as though he had had nothing to do
with the shameless, conscienceless, and unseemly duping and deception of
all these good people. He did not heed now the sobs and wailing of his
bereaved and wounded landlady. On the contrary, like a wary, callous
capitalist, anxious not to waste a minute in idleness even in the
coffin, he seemed to be wrapped up in some speculative calculation.
There was a look of deep reflection in his face, while his lips were
drawn together with a significant air, of which Semyon Ivanovitch during
his lifetime had not been suspected of being capable. He seemed, as it
were, to have grown shrewder, his right eye was, as it were, slyly
screwed up. Semyon Ivanovitch seemed wanting to say something, to make
some very important communication and explanation and without loss of
time, because things were complicated and there was not a minute to
lose.... And it seemed as though they could hear him.

"What is it? Give over, do you hear, you stupid woman? Don't whine! Go
to bed and sleep it off, my good woman, do you hear? I am dead; there's
no need of a fuss now. What's the use of it, really? It's nice to lie
here.... Though I don't mean that, do you hear? You are a fine lady, you
are a regular fine lady. Understand that; here I am dead now, but look
here, what if--that is, perhaps it can't be so--but I say what if I'm
not dead, what if I get up, do you hear? What would happen then?"




  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
  BRUNSWICK ST., STAMFORD ST., S.E. 1, AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK




  NOVELS BY FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY

  Translated from the Russian by
  CONSTANCE GARNETT.


  THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV
  THE IDIOT
  THE POSSESSED
  CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
  THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD
  THE INSULTED AND INJURED
  A RAW YOUTH
  THE ETERNAL HUSBAND, etc.
  THE GAMBLER, etc.
  WHITE NIGHTS, etc.
  AN HONEST THIEF, etc. (_shortly_)
  THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY (_in progress_)


  NOVELS BY IVAN TURGENEV

  Translated from the Russian by
  CONSTANCE GARNETT.


  RUDIN
  A HOUSE OF GENTLEFOLK
  ON THE EVE
  FATHERS AND CHILDREN
  SMOKE
  VIRGIN SOIL (2 vols.)
  A SPORTSMAN'S SKETCHES (2 vols.)
  DREAM TALES AND PROSE POEMS
  THE TORRENTS OF SPRING
  A LEAR OF THE STEPPES, etc.
  THE DIARY OF A SUPERFLUOUS MAN, etc.
  A DESPERATE CHARACTER, etc.
  THE JEW, etc.


  NEW YORK
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY




Transcriber's Notes:

The list of novels translated by Constance Garnett was moved from front
of book to the end. Punctuation was standardized. Spaces were removed
from elipses when used to separate syllables within a word, e.g.,
sus...pic...ion. Archaic and non-standard spelling was retained, except
as noted below.

Changes to text:

  'grandchlid' to 'grandchild' ... I tell you this, grandchild, ...
  'terrestial' to 'terrestrial' ... whole terrestrial globe ...
  'consciouness' to 'consciousness' ... to your consciousness ...
  'gentlemen' to 'gentleman' ... I knew a gentleman who ...
  'extraordinary' to 'extraordinarily' ... everything will be
    extraordinarily rational ...
  'freewill' to 'free will' for consistency with remaining text
    ... without free will and without ...
    ... so-called free will ...
  'And' to 'Am' ... Am I a scoundrel?...
  'too' to 'to' ... Where will the poor fellow be off to?...
  'cried' to 'cries' ... I heard cries of bewilderment ...
  'intrgiue' to 'intrigue' ... The intrigue was not such ...

Additions to text:

  added missing 'to' ... if not to-day ...
  added missing 'a' ... It was a waste of time ...





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of White Nights and Other Stories, by 
Fyodor Dostoevsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITE NIGHTS AND OTHER STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 36034-8.txt or 36034-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/3/36034/

Produced by Jan-Fabian Humann, Carol Ann Brown, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's The Making of the New Testament, by Benjamin W. Bacon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Making of the New Testament

Author: Benjamin W. Bacon

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39288]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ***




Produced by David Edwards, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT


  THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE

  Editors of THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE

  Rt. Hon. H. A. L. Fisher, M.A., F.B.A.
  Prof. Gilbert Murray, Litt.D., LL.D., F.B.A.
  Prof. J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., LL.D.


  _For list of volumes in the Library see end of book._

  THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

  _By_ BENJAMIN W. BACON D.D.

  PROFESSOR OF NEW CRITICISM AND EXEGESIS IN YALE UNIVERSITY

  [Illustration]

  THORNTON BUTTERWORTH LIMITED 15 BEDFORD STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

_First Impression September 1912 - All Rights Reserved_

MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




CONTENTS


  PART I

  CANONIZATION AND CRITICISM

   CHAP.                                                       PAGE

      I INSPIRATION AND CANONIZATION                              7

     II THE REACTION TO CRITICISM                                33


    PART II

    THE LITERATURE OF THE APOSTLE

    III PAUL AS MISSIONARY AND DEFENDER OF THE GOSPEL OF GRACE   56

     IV PAUL AS PRISONER AND CHURCH FATHER                       83

      V PSEUDO-APOSTOLIC EPISTLES                               104


    PART III

    THE LITERATURE OF CATECHIST AND PROPHET

     VI THE MATTHÆAN TRADITION OF THE PRECEPTS OF JESUS         128

    VII THE PETRINE TRADITION. EVANGELIC STORY                  154

   VIII THE JOHANNINE TRADITION. PROPHECY                       185


   PART IV

   THE LITERATURE OF THE THEOLOGIAN

     IX THE SPIRITUAL GOSPEL AND EPISTLES                       206

      X EPILOGUES AND CONCLUSIONS                               233

        BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            251

        INDEX                                                   255




THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

PART I


CANONIZATION AND CRITICISM

CHAPTER I

INSPIRATION AND CANONIZATION


The New Testament presents the paradox of a literature born of protest
against the tyranny of a canon, yet ultimately canonized itself through
an increasing demand for external authority. This paradox is full of
significance. We must examine it more closely.

The work of Jesus was a consistent effort to set religion free from the
deadening system of the scribes. He was conscious of a direct, divine
authority. The broken lights of former inspiration are lost in the full
dawn of God's presence to His soul.

So with Paul. The key to Paul's thought is his revolt against legalism.
It had been part of his servitude to persecute the sect which claimed to
know another Way besides the "way"[1] of the scribes. These Christians
signalized their faith by the rite of baptism, and gloried in the sense
of endowment with "the Spirit." Saul was profoundly conscious of the
yoke; only he had not drammed that his own deliverance could come from
such a quarter. But contact with victims of the type of Stephen, men
"filled with the Spirit," conscious of the very "power from God" for
lack of which his soul was fainting, could not but have some effect. It
came suddenly, overwhelmingly. The real issue, as Saul saw it, both
before and after his conversion, was Law _versus_ Grace. In seeking
"justification" by favour of Jesus these Christians were opening a new
and living way to acceptance with God. Traitorous and apostate as the
attempt must seem while the way of the Law still gave promise of
success, to souls sinking like Saul's deeper and deeper into the
despairing consciousness of "the weakness of the flesh" forgiveness in
the name of Jesus might prove to be light and life from God. The
despised sect of 'sinners' whom he had been persecuting expressed the
essence of their faith in the doctrine that the gift of the Spirit of
Jesus had made them sons and heirs of God. If the converted Paul in turn
is uplifted--"energized," as he terms it--even beyond his
fellow-Christians, by the sense of present inspiration, it is no more
than we should expect.

    Footnote 1: _Tarik_, i. e. "way," is still the Arabic term for a
    sect, and the Rabbinic term for legal requirement is _halacha_, i.
    e. "walk."

Paul's conversion to the new faith--or at least his persistent
satisfaction in it--will be inexplicable unless we appreciate the logic
of his recognition in it of an inherent opposition to the growing
demands of legalism. Jesus had, in truth, led a revolt against mere
book-religion. His chief opponents were the scribes, the devotees and
exponents of a sacred scripture, the Law. "Law" and "Prophets," the one
prescribing the conditions of the expected transcendental Kingdom, the
other illustrating their application and guaranteeing their promise,
constituted the canon of the synagogue. Judaism had become a religion of
written authority. Jesus set over against this a direct relation to the
living Father in heaven, ever presently revealed to the filial spirit.
The Sermon on the Mount makes the doing of this Father's will something
quite other than servitude to written precepts interpreted by official
authority and imposed under penalty. It is to be self-discipline in the
Father's spirit of disinterested goodness, as revealed in everyday
experience.

Even the reward of this self-discipline, the Kingdom, Jesus did not
conceive quite as the scribes. To them obedience in this world procured
a "share in the world to come." To Him the reward was more a matter of
being than of getting. The Kingdom was an heir-apparency; and,
therefore, present as well as future. It was "within" and "among" men as
well as before them. They should seek to "be sons and daughters of the
Highest," taking for granted that all other good things would be
"added." So Jesus made religion live again. It became spiritual, inward,
personal, actual.

After John the Baptist's ministry to what we should call the
'unchurched' masses, Jesus took up their cause. He became the "friend"
and champion of the "little ones," the "publicans and sinners," the
mixed 'people of the land' in populous, half-heathen, Galilee. The
burdens imposed by the scribes in the name of 'Scripture' were accepted
with alacrity by the typical Pharisee unaffected by Pauline misgivings
of 'moral inability.' To "fulfil all righteousness" was to the Pharisee
untainted by Hellenism a pride and delight. To the "lost sheep of
Israel" whom Jesus addressed, remote from temple and synagogue, this
"righteousness" had proved (equally as to Paul, though on very different
grounds) "a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear."
Jesus "had compassion on the multitude." To them he "spoke with
authority"; and yet "not as the scribes" but as "a prophet." When
challenged by the scribes for his authority he referred to "the baptism
of John," and asked whether John's commission was "from heaven, or of
men." They admitted that John was "a prophet." Those who give utterance
after this manner to the simple, sincere conviction of the soul, voicing
its instinctive aspiration toward "the things that be of God," are
conscious that they speak not of themselves.

Jesus, it is true, was no iconoclast. He took pains to make clear that
if he superseded what they of old time had taught as righteousness, it
was in the interest of a higher, a "righteousness of God." If he
disregarded fasts and sabbaths, it was to put substance for form, end
for means. "Judgment, mercy, and good faith" should count more than
tithes from "mint and anise and cummin." He echoed what John the Baptist
had taught of repentance and forgiveness. Hope should no longer be based
on birth, or prerogative, or ritual form, but on the mercy of a God who
demands that we forgive if we would be forgiven. Such had been, however,
the message not of John only, but of all the prophets before him: "I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice." Jesus taught this higher, inward,
righteousness; but not merely as John had done. John had said: Repent,
for the wrath of God is at hand. Jesus said: Repent, for the forgiveness
of God is open. The Father's heart yearns over the wayward sons. Jesus
preached the nearness of the Kingdom as "glad tidings to the poor"; and
among these "poor" were included even aliens who put "faith" in the God
of Abraham.

The new Way started from the same Scripture as that of the scribes, but
it tended in an opposite direction. Theirs had been gradually developing
in definiteness and authority since the time of Ezra; yes, since Josiah
had made formal covenant, after the discovery of "the book of the Law"
in the temple, pledging himself and his people to obedience. As with
many ancient peoples, the codification of the ancient law had been
followed by its canonization, and as the national life had waned the
religious significance of the Law had increased. It was now declared to
express the complete will of God, for an ideal people of God, in a
renovated universe, whose centre was to be a new and glorified
Jerusalem. The Exile interrupted for a time the process of formal
development; but in the ecclesiastical reconstruction which followed in
Ezra's time "the book of the Law" had become all the more supreme; the
scribe took the place of the civil officer, the synagogue became local
sanctuary and court-house in one, the nation became a church, Israel
became 'the people of the book.'

Legal requirement calls for the incentive of reward. We need not wonder,
then, that the canon of the Law was soon supplemented by that of the
writings of the Prophets, historical and hortatory. The former were
considered to interpret the Law by showing its application in practice,
the latter were valued for their predictive element. Law and Prophets
were supplemented by Psalms, and elements from the later literature
having application to the religious system. The most influential were
the "apocalypses," or "revelations" of the transcendental Kingdom and of
the conditions and mode of its coming. Scripture had thus become an
embodiment of Israel's religion. It set forth the national law, civil,
criminal, or religious; and the national hope, the Kingdom of God. Its
custodian and interpreter was the 'scribe,' lawyer and cleric in one.
The scribe held "the key of knowledge"; to him it was given to 'bind and
loose,' 'open and shut.' Any preacher who presumed to prescribe a
righteousness apart from 'the yoke of the Law,' or to promise
forgiveness of sins on other authority, must reckon with the scribes. He
would be regarded as seeking to 'take the Kingdom by violence.'

Jesus' martyrdom was effected through the priests, the temple
authorities; but at the instigation of the scribes and Pharisees. His
adherents were soon after driven out from orthodox Judaism and subjected
to persecution. This persecution, however, soon found its natural
leadership, not among the Sadducean temple-priesthood, but among the
devotees of the Law. It was "in the synagogues." From having been
quasi-political it became distinctly religious. This persecution by the
Pharisees is on the whole less surprising than the fact that so many of
the Jewish believers should have continued to regard themselves as
consistent Pharisees, and even been so regarded by their fellow-Jews. In
reality Jewish Christians as a rule could see no incompatibility between
average synagogue religion and their acceptance of Jesus as the man
supernaturally attested in the resurrection as destined to return
bringing the glory of the Kingdom. Jesus' idea of 'righteousness' did
not seem to them irreconcilable with the legalism of the scribes; still
less had they felt the subtle difference between his promise "Ye shall
be sons and daughters of the Highest" and the apocalyptic dreams which
they shared with their fellow-Jews. Saul the persecutor and Paul the
apostle were more logical. In Gal. ii. 15-21 we have Paul's own
statement of the essential issue as it still appeared to his clear mind.
Average synagogue religion still left room for a more fatherly relation
of God to the individual, in spite of the gradual encroachment of the
legalistic system of the scribes. Men not sensitive to inconsistency
could find room within the synagogue for the 'paternal theism' of Jesus,
even if this must more and more be placed under the head of
'uncovenanted mercies.' To Paul, however, the dilemma is absolute. One
must trust either to "law" or "grace." Partial reliance on the one is to
just that extent negation of faith in the other. The system of written
precept permits no exception, tolerates no divided allegiance. If the
canon of written law be the God-given condition of the messianic
promise, then no man can aspire to share in the hope of Israel who does
not submit unreservedly to its yoke. Conversely, faith is not faith if
one seek to supplement it by the merit of "works of law."

From this point of view the Jew who seeks forgiveness of sins by baptism
"into the name of Jesus" must be considered an apostate from the Law. He
acknowledges thereby that he is following another Way, a way of "grace,"
a short-cut, as it were, to a share in Israel's messianic inheritance by
the "favour" of a pretended Messiah. The same Paul who after his
conversion maintains (Gal. ii. 21) that to seek "justification" through
the Law makes the grace of God of none effect, must conversely have held
before conversion that to seek it by "grace" of Jesus made the Law of
none effect. Even at the time of writing the axiom still held: No
resistance to the yoke of the Law, no persecution (Gal. v. 11).

It is true, then, that the legalistic system of prescription and reward
had developed--could develop--only at the expense of the less
mechanical, more fatherly, religion of a Hosea or an Isaiah. Even
scribes had admitted that the law of love was "much more than all whole
burnt-offering and sacrifice." And the movement of the Baptist and of
Jesus had really been of the nature of a reaction toward this older,
simpler faith. The sudden revolt in Paul's own mind against the scribal
system might not have occurred in the mind of a Pharisee unfamiliar with
Greek ideas. But to some extent Paul's experience of the conflict of
flesh and spirit, a 'moral inability' to meet the Law's demands _was_ a
typical Christian experience, as Paul felt it to be. To him it became
the basis of an independent gospel. To him the Cross and the Spirit
imparted from the risen Messiah were tokens from God that the
dispensation of Law is ended and a dispensation of Grace and Son ship
begun. Without this Pauline gospel _about_ Jesus Christianity could
never have become more than a sect of reformed Judaism.

The teaching and martyrdom of Jesus had thus served to bring out a deep
and real antithesis. Only, men who had not passed like Paul from the
extreme of trust in legalism to a corresponding extremity of despair
might be pardoned for some insensibility to this inconsistency. We can
appreciate that James and Peter might honestly hold themselves still
under obligation of the written law, even while we admit Paul's logic
that any man who had once "sought to be justified in Christ" could not
turn back in any degree to legal observance without being
"self-condemned."

Christianity may be said to have attained self-consciousness as a new
religion in the great argument directed by Paul along the lines of his
own gospel against Peter and the older apostles. Its victory as a
universal religion of 'grace' over the limitations of Judaism was due to
the common doctrine of 'the Spirit.' This was the one point of
agreement, the one hope of ultimate concord among the contending
parties. All were agreed that endowment with 'the Spirit' marks the
Christian. It was in truth the great inheritance from Jesus shared by
all in common. And Peter and James admitted that to deny that
uncircumcized Gentiles had received the Spirit was to "contend against
God."

After Paul's death ecclesiastical development took mostly the road of
the synagogue. The sense of the presence and authority of 'the Spirit'
grew weaker, the authority of the letter stronger. From the outset even
the Pauline churches, in ritual, order, observance, had followed
instinctively this pattern. All continued, as a matter of course, to use
the synagogue's sacred writings. Paul himself, spite of his protest
against "the letter," could make no headway against his opponents, save
by argument from 'Scripture.' He had found in it anticipations and
predictions of his own Christian faith; but by an exegesis often only
little less forced and fantastic than that of the rabbinic schools in
which he had been trained. This was a necessity of the times. The
reasoning, fallacious as it seems to-day, had appealed to and
strengthened Paul's own faith, and was probably effective with others,
even if the faith really rested on other grounds than the reasoning by
which it was defended. The results of this biblicism were not all
salutary. The claims of written authority were loosened rather than
broken. Paul himself had found room enough within these defences for the
religion of the Spirit; but a generation was coming with less of the
sense of present inspiration. Dependence on past authority would be
increased in this new generation in direct proportion to its sense of
the superior 'inspiration' of the generation which had gone before. Paul
is unhampered by even "the scriptures of the prophets" because in his
view these take all their authority and meaning from "the Lord, the
Spirit." Hence "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." Only
the remembered "word of the Lord" has authority for Paul beyond his own,
even when he thinks that he also has the Spirit. With that exception
past revelation is for Paul subordinate to present. But Paul's immediate
disciple, the author of Hebrews, is already on a lower plane. This
writer looks back to a threefold source of authority: God had spoken in
former ages "by the prophets" and to the present "by a Son," but he
looks also to an apostolic authority higher than his own: The word "was
confirmed unto us by them that heard, God also bearing witness with
them, both by signs and wonders, and by manifold powers, and by gifts
of the Holy Ghost." Similarly the author of the Pastoral Epistles
(90-100?) holds the "pattern of sound words" heard from Paul as a
"sacred deposit," which is "guarded," rather than revealed, "by the Holy
Spirit." The "sound words" in question are defined to be "the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ." These, taken together with "the doctrine which
is according to godliness," fix the standard of orthodoxy. To "Jude"
(100-110?) the faith is something "once for all delivered to the
saints." His message is: "Remember, beloved, the words spoken before by
the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ." Authority increases, the sense
of the revealing Spirit decreases.

It is long before the sense of present inspiration, both in word and
work is lost; still longer before the recorded precepts of Jesus, the
exhortations and directions of apostles, the visions of "prophets," come
to take their place alongside the Bible of the synagogue as "writings of
the new covenant." Melito of Sardis (_c._ 170) is the first to use this
expression, and even in his case it does not bear the sense of a canon
with definite limits. Tertullian (200-210) is the first to place a
definite "New Testament" over against the Old. We must glance at some of
the intermediate steps to appreciate this gradual process of
canonization.

At first there is no other 'Scripture' than the synagogue's. Clement of
Rome (95) still uses only the Law and the Prophets (including certain
apocrypha now lost) as his Bible. He refers to the precepts of Jesus
(quoted as in Acts XX. 35 from oral tradition), with the same sense as
Paul of their paramount authority, and bids the Corinthians whom he
addresses give heed to what the blessed Apostle Paul had written to them
"in the beginning of the gospel service," to warn them against
factiousness. Nor has Clement yet lost the sense of direct inspiration;
for he attaches to his own epistle, written in behalf of the church at
Rome, the same superhuman authority claimed in Acts XV. 28 for the
letter sent by the church at Jerusalem. If the Corinthians disregard the
"words spoken by God through us" they will "incur no slight
transgression and danger," for these warnings of a sister church are
uttered in the name and by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Still, Clement
does not dream of comparing his authority, even when he writes as agent
of the church, with that of "the oracles of the teaching of God," the
"sacred Scriptures," the "Scriptures which are true, which were given
through the Holy Ghost, wherein is written nothing unrighteous or
counterfeit." He does not even rank his own authority with that of "the
good apostles, Peter and Paul."

Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, transported to Rome for martyrdom in
110-117, employs a brief stay among the churches of Asia to exhort them
to resist the encroachments of heresy by consolidation of church
organization, discipline, strict obedience to the bishop. Ignatius, too,
still feels the afflatus. His message, he declares with emphasis, was
revealed to him, together with the occasion for it, directly from
heaven. It was "the voice of God and not only of a man" when he cried
out among the Philadelphians: "Give heed to the bishop, and the
presbytery and deacons." Yet Ignatius cannot enjoin the Romans as Peter
and Paul did. They were "apostles." He is "a convict." His inspiration,
however undoubted, is of a lower order.

Hermas, a 'prophet' of the same Roman church as Clement, though a
generation later, is still so conscious of the superhuman character of
his "Visions," "Parables," and "Mandates" that he gives them out for
circulation as inspired messages of the Spirit; and this not for Rome
alone. Clement, then apparently still living, and "the one to whom this
duty is committed," is to send them "to foreign cities." In point of
fact the _Shepherd_ of Hermas long held a place for many churches as
part of the New Testament canon. Yet less than a generation after
Hermas, the claim to exercise the gift of prophecy in the church was
looked upon as dangerous if not heretical.

In the nature of the case it was really impossible that the original
sense of endowment with "the Spirit" should survive. Not only did the
rapidly growing reverence for the apostles and the Lord open a chasm
separating "the word of wisdom and the word of power" given to that age,
from the slighter contemporary claims of miracle and revelation; the
very growth and wide dissemination of the gospel message made
standardization imperative. Before the middle of the second century
Gnostic schism had swept nearly half the church into the vortex of
speculative heresy. Marcion at Rome (_c._ 140) carried Pauline
anti-legalism to the extreme of an entire rejection of the Old
Testament. Judaism and all its works and ways were to be repudiated. The
very God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was declared other than, and
ignorant of, the "heavenly Father" of Jesus. Against such vagaries there
must be some historic standard. Even Marcion himself looked to the past,
however recent, as the source of light, and since some written standard
must be found, it was he, the heretic, who gave to Christianity its
first canon of Christian writings. The Marcionite churches did away with
the public reading of the Law and the Prophets, and could only put in
their place "Gospel" and "Apostle." Not that Epistles, Gospels, and even
'Revelations' were not also in use among the orthodox; but they are not
yet referred to as 'Scripture.' Even gospels are treated merely as aids
to the memory in transmitting the teaching of the Lord. This teaching
itself is but the authoritative interpretation of Law and Prophets, and
is in turn interpreted by the writings of the apostles.

Marcion's 'Gospel' consisted of our Luke, expurgated according to his
own ideas. His 'Apostle' contained the Epistles of Paul minus the
Pastoral Epistles and a series of passages cancelled out from the rest
as Jewish interpolations. This was the first Christian Bible distinct
from 'the Scriptures' of the synagogue.

Indirectly the growth of Gnostic heresy contributed still more to the
increasing authority of apostolic and quasi-apostolic writings. One of
its earliest and most obnoxious forms was called 'Doketism,' from its
exaggeration of Paulinism into a complete repudiation of the historic
Jesus, whose earthly career was stigmatized as mere 'phantasm'
(_dokesis_). Doketism is known to us not only through description by
orthodox opponents, but by a few writings of its own. It is the type of
heresy antagonized in the Johannine Epistles (_c._ 100) and in those of
Ignatius (110-117). Now Ignatius, as we have seen, relied mainly on
church organization and discipline. The Pastoral Epistles (90-100),
while they emphasize also "the form of healthful words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus" take, on the whole, a similar direction. But 1st
John, which relies far less than the Pastoral Epistles or Ignatius on
mere church organization, is also driven back upon the life and teaching
of Jesus as the historic standard. It _does_, therefore, make formal
appeal to the sacred tradition in both its elements, but with a
difference characteristic of the Pauline spirit. The redeeming life and
death of Jesus are viewed as a manifestation of "the life, even the
eternal life (of the Logos) which was with the Father and was manifested
unto us" (the historic body of believers). Again Jesus' one "new
commandment," the law of love, is the epitome of all righteousness.

In his doctrine of Scripture as in many other respects the Johannine
writer shows a breadth and catholicity of mind which almost anticipates
the development of later ages. His task was in fact the adjustment of
the developed Pauline gospel to a type of Christianity more nearly akin
to synagogue tradition. This type had grown up under the name of Peter.
On the question of the standard of written authority 'John'[2] leaves
room for the freedom of the Spirit so splendidly set forth in the
teaching and example of Jesus and Paul, while he resists the erratic
licence of "those that would lead you astray." The result is a doctrine
of historic authority in general, and of that of the Scriptures in
particular, sharply differentiated from the Jewish, and deserving in
every respect to be treated as the basis of the Christian. In a great
chapter of his Gospel (John v.), wherein Jesus debates with the scribes
the question of His own authority, the dialogue closes with a
denunciation of them because they search the Scriptures with the idea
that in them they have eternal life, that is, they treat them as a code
of precepts, obedience to which will be thus rewarded. On the contrary,
says Jesus, the Scriptures only "bear witness" to the life that is
present in Himself as the incarnate, eternal, Word; "but ye will not
come unto me that ye might have life."

    Footnote 2: In using traditional names and titles such as "Luke,"
    "John," "Matthew," "James," no assumption is made as to
    authenticity. The designation is employed for convenience
    irrespective of its critical accuracy or inaccuracy.

In seeking the life behind the literature as the real revelation, the
Johannine writer makes the essential distinction between Jewish and
Christian doctrine. He stands between Paul, whose peculiar view was
based on an exceptional personal experience, and the modern
investigator, who can but treat all literary monuments and records of
religious movements objectively, as data for the history and psychology
of religion. If the student be devoutly minded the Scriptures will be to
him, too, however conditioned by the idiosyncrasies of temporal
environment and individual character, manifestations of "the life, even
the eternal life, which was with the Father and was manifested unto us."

But the Johannine writer was far deeper and more 'spiritual'[3] than the
trend of his age. Ignatius' friend and contemporary, Polycarp, "the
father of the Christians" of Asia, in his Epistle to the Philippians
(110-117) urges avoidance of the false teachers who "pervert the sayings
of the Lord to their own lusts, denying the (bodily) resurrection and
judgment." But he has no better remedy than to "turn (probably in a
somewhat mechanical way) to the tradition handed down from the
beginning" and to study "the Epistles of Paul." The former process is in
full application in Polycarp's later colleague, Papias of Hierapolis
(_c._ 145?), who publishes a little volume entitled _Interpretation of
the Sayings of the Lord_. It is based on carefully authenticated
traditions of the 'apostles and elders,' especially a certain
contemporary "Elder John" who speaks for the Jerusalem succession.
According to Papias our two Greek Gospels of Matthew and Mark represent
two apostolic sources, the one an Aramaic compilation of the Precepts of
Jesus by Matthew, the other anecdotes of his "sayings and doings"
collated from the preaching of Peter.

    Footnote 3: The Fourth Gospel is thus characterized by Clement of
    Alexandria, meaning that it had a deep symbolic sense.

Grateful as we must be for Papias' efforts to authenticate evangelic
tradition, since they are corroborated in their main results by all
other ancient tradition as well as by critical study of the documents,
it is noticeable how they stand in line with the tendencies of the age.
Eusebius (325) characterizes the reign of Trajan (98-117) as a period
when many undertook to disseminate in writing "the divine Gospels." One
of our own evangelists, whose work must probably be referred to the
beginning of this period, but is not mentioned by 'the Elder,' alludes
to the same phenomenon. The apostles were gone. Hence to Luke[4] the
question of "order" was a perplexity, as the Elder observes that it had
already been to Mark. Soon after Luke and Papias comes Basilides with
his _Exegetics_, probably based on Luke (120?), and Marcion (140), both
engaged from their own point of view with the current questions of
Jesus' teaching and ministry.

    Footnote 4: See Footnote 3 above.

Thus, at the beginning of the second century, the elements necessary to
the formation of a New Testament canon were all at hand. They included
the tradition of the teaching and work of Jesus, the letters of apostles
and church leaders revered as given by authority of the Spirit and the
visions and revelations of 'prophets.' Not only the elements were
present, the irresistible pressure of the times was certain to force
them into crystallization. The wonder is not that the canon should have
been formed, but that it should have been delayed so long.

For there were also resistant factors. Phrygia, the scene of Paul's
first great missionary conquests, the immemorial home of religious
enthusiasm, became the seat, about the middle of the second century, of
a movement of protest against the church policy of consolidation and
standardization. Montanus arose to maintain the persistence in the
church of the gift of prophecy, tracing the succession in both the male
and female line back to Silas the companion of Paul and the prophesying
daughters of Philip the Evangelist. The 'Phrygians,' as they were
called, naturally made much of the writings current in Asia Minor,
especially the book of 'prophecy' attributed to 'John.' Theoretically
indeed the church was unwilling to acknowledge the disappearance of this
gift. To Hermas (130-140) and the _Teaching of the Twelve_ (120-130) it
is still a "sin against the Spirit" to interrupt or oppose a prophet
during his ecstatic utterance. On the other hand, the _Teaching_
reiterates the apostolic warnings to "try the spirits," with
prohibitions of specific excesses of the order. Moreover by the time of
Montanus and the 'Phrygians' theoretical recognition of revelation
through the prophets was rapidly giving way before the practical dangers
inseparable from 'revelations' of this enthusiastic character, of which
any member of the church, man or woman, ignorant or learned, lay or
cleric, might be the recipient. The strict regulative control imposed by
both Paul and John[5] upon this type of spiritual gift (1st Thess. v. 20
f.; 1st Cor. xii. 3; xv. 29 f. 32; _cf._ 1st John iv. 1) was found
to be doubly necessary in face of the disintegrating tendencies of the
post-apostolic age, and after long debate and much protest the movement
of Montanus was at last decreed heretical at Rome, though Irenæus (186)
interceded for it, and Tertullian (210) became a convert.

    Footnote 5: See Footnote 3 above.

The history of this movement in the formative period of the New
Testament canon explains why the "revelations of the prophets" obtained
but scant recognition as compared with the "word of the Lord" and the
"commandment of the apostles." Last of the three, in order of rank (1st
Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11), last also to be codified in written form, we
need not be surprised that our present New Testament retains but a
single one of the once current books of 'prophecy.' For a time the
_Shepherd_ of Hermas and the _Apocalypse of Peter_ rivalled the claims
to canonicity of our own Revelation of John, but were soon dropped. Our
own Apocalypse has suffered more opposition than any other New Testament
writing, being still excluded from the canon in some branches of the
church. Its precarious place at the end of the canon which we moderns
have inherited from Athanasius (_ob._ 373) was due, in fact, far less to
its author's vigorous assertions of authority as an inspired "prophet"
(i. 1-3; xxii. 6-9, 18 f.) than to the claims to apostolicity put
forward in the preface and appendix. For until the third century no one
drammed of understanding the "John" of Rev. i. 4, 9 and xxii. 8
otherwise than as the Apostle. Eusebius accordingly (325) is uncertain
only as to whether the book should be classed in his first group of
"accepted" writings, along with the Gospels and Pauline Epistles, or in
the third as "spurious." If written by "some other John than the
Apostle" he would not even honour it with a place in his second group of
"disputed" books, along with Hebrews, James, Jude, and 2nd Peter.

Thus at the end of the second century, while there was still much
dispute (destined indeed to continue for centuries) as to the _limits_
of the New Testament canon, there had in fact come to be a real
canonical New Testament set over against the Old, as of equal, or even
greater authority. The "word of the Lord," the "commandment of the
apostles," and at last even the "revelations of the prophets," had
successively ceased as living realities, and become crystallized into
written form. They had been codified and canonized. The church had
travelled the beaten track of the synagogue, and all the more rapidly
from the example set before it. None of the early canons (_i. e._ lists
of writings permitted to be read in the churches) coincides exactly, it
is true, with the New Testament current among ourselves. The list of
Athanasius is the first to give just our books. The Roman list of the
Muratorian fragment (185-200) omits Hebrews, James and 2nd Peter, and
gives at least a partial sanction to the _Apocalypse of Peter_. The
lists of Origen (_ob._ 251) and Eusebius (325) vary as respects both
inclusion and exclusion. All early authorities express a doubtful
judgment regarding the outer fringe of minor writings such as James,
Jude, 2nd Peter, 2nd and 3rd John. Even those of larger content, such as
Hebrews and Revelation, if their apostolicity was questioned, remained
subjects of dispute. But already by A.D. 200 the time had long since
passed when any of the thirteen epistles bearing the name of Paul could
be deemed open to question. Marcion's exclusion of the three Pastorals
had been forgotten. Dispute of the four-gospel canon could still be
tolerated; but not for long. Irenæus (186) has no patience with "those
wretched men" who cannot see that in the nature of the case there should
be neither more nor less than this number. But he explicitly refers to
those who disputed "that aspect of the gospel which is called John's."
There were, in fact, opponents of Montanism at Rome, who under the lead
of Gaius had denied the authenticity of all the writings attributed to
John, including the Gospel itself. But even those of the orthodox who
were willing enough to reject Revelation, with its now unfashionable
eschatology, agreed that Gaius' attack upon the fourth Gospel was too
radical. The small body who continued for a few generations to resist
the inclusion of any of the Johannine writings in the canon remained
without influence, and were ultimately forgotten. The 'catholic'[6]
church had repudiated heresy, standardized the faith, and confined its
recognized historic expression to a 'canon' of New Testament Scripture.

    Footnote 6: Catholic is here used in its etymological sense of
    "general" or universal. We shall have occasion to apply the term in
    a more limited sense hereafter.




CHAPTER II

THE REACTION TO CRITICISM


The consolidated 'catholic' church of the third century might seem, so
far as its doctrine of Scripture was concerned, to have retraced its
steps to a standpoint corresponding completely to that of the synagogue.
Only, the paradox still held that the very writings canonized were those
supremely adapted to evoke a spirit of resistance to the despotism of
either priest or scribe. The Protestant Reformation was a revolt against
the former, and it is noticeable how large a part was played by the New
Testament doctrine of the 'Spirit' in this struggle of spiritual
democracy against hierocratic tyranny. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians
became Luther's Palladium.

But the post-Reformation dogmatists took fright at their own freedom.
The prediction of the Romanists that repudiation of traditional
authority in its ecclesiastical embodiment would result in internecine
schism and conflict seemed on the point of being realized. The
theological system-makers, like their predecessors of the post-apostolic
age, could see no way out but to throw all their weight on a past
inspiration assumed to be without error. The canonical books were
declared to furnish an infallible rule of faith and practice.

It was in the sincere desire to meet the requirements of this theory
that the science of criticism grew up. In the earlier days it did not
venture for the most part beyond what is known as 'textual' criticism.
For a doctrine of inerrancy is manifestly unserviceable until errors of
transmission have been eliminated. Textual criticism set itself to this
task, asking the question: As between the various readings found in
different New Testament manuscripts, which is original? Unfortunately,
to meet the logical requirement the critic, if not backed like those of
Rome by a papal guarantee, must himself be infallible. The inevitable
result of this attempt, begun in the sincerest spirit of apologetics,
was to prove that an infallible text is hopelessly unattainable. Textual
criticism is indispensable; but as the servant of apologetics it is
foredoomed to failure.

The variation of the manuscripts was not the only obstacle to biblical
infallibility. To say nothing of differences of interpretation there was
the question of the canon. Either the decision of the 'catholic' church
must be accepted as infallible, or scholarship must undertake a
'criticism of the canon' to defend the current list of "inspired" books.
A 'higher' criticism became necessary if only to vindicate the church's
choice on historical grounds. Roman Catholics like Simon, whose
_Critical History_ of the Biblical books appeared in 1689-1695, could
reopen the question with impunity. Those who based their authority on
the infallibility of Scripture alone could not meet the challenge
otherwise than as Michælis did in his _Introduction to the Divine
Writings of the New Testament_ (1750-1780). Michælis undertook a
historical inquiry into the circumstances of origin of each of the
canonical books, with the object of proving each to be in reality what
tradition declared. The twenty-seven commonly accepted were supposed to
have been either written by apostles, or at least so super-intended and
guaranteed by them, as to cover all with the ægis of an infallibility
not conceded to the post-apostolic age. Scholarship in the harness of
apologetics again found its task impracticable. Michælis himself
confessed it "difficult" to prove authenticity in cases like that of the
Epistle of Jude. Conceive the task as the scientific vindication of a
verdict rendered centuries before on unknown grounds, but now deprived
of official authority, and it becomes inevitably hopeless. Can it be
expected that doctors will not disagree on the authenticity or
pseudonymity of 2nd Peter, who always have disagreed on this and similar
questions, and have just admitted failure to agree in the matter of
text?

For half a century criticism seemed lost in the slough of mere
controversy over the (assumed) infallible text, and the (assumed)
infallible canon. Apologists fought merely on the defensive,
endeavouring to prove that men whose fallibility was admitted had
nevertheless pronounced an infallible verdict on the most difficult
subjects of literary and historical inquiry. Critics had an easy task in
showing that the church's theory of inspiration and canonicity was
incorrect; but made no progress toward a constructive explanation of the
religious, or even the historical, significance of the literature. Real
progress was made only when criticism left off the attempt either to
establish or disestablish a 'received' text, or an 'authorized' canon,
and became simply an instrument in the hand of the historian, as he
seeks to trace to their origins the ideas the church enshrined in her
literature because she found them effective in her growth.

For the great awakening in which New Testament criticism 'found itself'
as a genuine and indispensable branch of the history of religion, we are
largely indebted to the eminent church historian, Ferdinand Christian
Baur (_ob._ 1860). Baur gathered up the fragmentary results of a
generation of mere negation, a war of independence against the tyranny
of dogmatic tradition, and sought to place the New Testament writings in
their true setting of primitive church history. His particular views
have been superseded. Subsequent study has disproved many of his
inferences, and brought from friend and foe far-reaching modifications
to his general theory. But, consciously or not, Baur, in making
criticism the hand-maid of history, was working in the interest of that
constructive, Christian, doctrine of inspired Scripture which an ancient
and nameless teacher of the church had described as "witness" to the
Life, "even the eternal life, which was with the Father," and is in man,
and has been manifested in the origin and historical development of our
religion.

The Reformation had been a revolt against the despotism of the priest;
this was a revolt against the despotism of the scribe.

Baur gave scant--too scant--consideration to early tradition, making his
results unduly negative. None of the New Testament books are dated; few
besides the Pauline Epistles embody even an author's name; and these
few, 1st and 2nd Peter, James, Jude and Revelation, were (1st Peter
alone excepted) just those which even the canon-makers had classified as
doubtful, or spurious. Not even a Calvin would support the authenticity
of 2nd Peter, a Luther had denied the value of James and Revelation. It
had been an easy task for 'criticism of the canon' to show that those
who determined its content had not been actuated by considerations of
pure science. Those books secured admission which were most widely
current as ancient and trustworthy, and whose orthodoxy met the
standards of the time. Those were disputed, or rejected, which were less
widely current, or unorthodox, or could establish no direct relation to
an apostle. It was proper for the critic, once his aim had become not
apologetic but historical, to drop once for all the question whether the
canon-makers' selection--made not for scientific, but for religious
purposes--is good, bad or indifferent. The time had come for him to
apply the available evidence to his own scientific question: What
relation do these several writings bear to the development of
Christianity? It remained to be seen whether he could offer constructive
evidence more convincing than tradition.

The latest date to which an undated, or disputed, writing can be
assigned is that when the marks of its employment by others, or
influence upon them, become undeniable. This is termed the 'external'
evidence. The earliest date, conversely, is that to which we are brought
down by references in the book itself to antecedent and current events,
and writings, or by undeniable marks of their influence. This is termed
the 'internal' evidence. Counting tradition as part of the external
evidence, modern scientific criticism is able to fix within a few
decades the origin of all the New Testament writings, without incurring
opposition even from the apologist. No scholar now dreams of adopting
any other method of proof, whatever his doctrinal proclivities. The
overwhelming majority are agreed that the period covered, from the
earliest Pauline Epistles to the latest brief fulminations against
Gnostic Doketism and denial of 'resurrection and judgment,' is included
in the century from A.D. 50 to 150.

Baur's conception of the course of events in this momentous century has
been described as a theory of historical progress by fusion of opposites
in a higher unity. The Hegelian scheme of thesis, antithesis and
synthesis had in fact some justification in the recognized phenomena of
the development of Christianity. It had sprung from Judaism, overcoming
the particularism of that still nationalistic faith by the sense of its
mission to the world at large. The conflict acknowledged in all the
sources and most vividly reflected in the great Epistles of Paul to the
Galatians, Corinthians and Romans, a conflict between those who
conceived Christianity as a universal religion, and those who looked
upon it as only a reformed, spiritualized and perfected Judaism, was the
characteristic phenomenon of the first or apostolic age. It was the
struggle of the infant faith against its swaddling bands. The critical
historian is compelled to estimate all later, anonymous, accounts of
this development in the light of the confessedly earlier, and
indubitably authentic records, the four great Epistles of Paul; for
these simply reflect the actual conditions, and are not affected by the
later disposition to idealize the story. Thesis and antithesis were
therefore really in evidence at the beginnings.

Equal unanimity prevailed as to the close of the period in question. In
A.D. 150 to 200, Christianity was solidifying into the 'catholic'
church, rejecting extremes of doctrine on both sides, formulating its
'rule of faith,' determining its canon, centralizing administrative
control. It had thrown off as heretical upon the extreme left Marcion
and the Gnostics, who either repudiated the Jewish scriptures
altogether, or interpreted them with more than Pauline freedom. On the
extreme right it had renounced the unprogressive Ebionites of Palestine,
still unreconciled to Paul, and insistent on submission to the Law for
Jew and Gentile, as the condition of a 'share in the world to come.'
What could be imagined as to the course of events in the intervening
century of obscurity? Must it not have witnessed a progressive
divergence of the extremes of Paulinists and Judaizers, coincidently
with a rapprochement of the moderates from the side of Peter and that of
Paul respectively? Baur's outline seemed thus to describe adequately the
main course of events. He relied upon internal evidence to determine the
dates of the disputed writings and their relation to it. But 'criticism
of the canon' in Baur's own, and in the preceding generation, had come
to include among the writings of doubtful date and authenticity not only
those disputed in antiquity, and the anonymous narrative books, but also
1st Peter and the minor Epistles of Paul. Nothing strictly apostolic was
left save the four great Epistles of Paul.

The theory of Baur and the Tübingen school (for so his followers came to
be designated) was broadly conceived and ably advocated. In two vital
respects it has had permanent influence. (1) Criticism, as already
noted, has ceased to be mere debate about text and canon, and concerns
itself to-day primarily with the history of Christian ideas as embodied
in its primitive literature. Its problem is to relate the New Testament
writings, together with all other cognate material, to the history of
the developing religion from its earliest traceable form in the greater
Pauline Epistles to where it emerges into the full light of day toward
the close of the second century. (2) Again, Baur's outline of the
process through which the nascent faith attained to full
self-consciousness as a world-religion required correction rather than
disproof. It was a grievous mistake to identify Peter, James, and John
with those whom Paul bitterly denounces as Judaizing "false brethren,"
"super extra apostles," "ministers of Satan." It was a perversion of
internal evidence to reject as post-Pauline the Epistles of the later
period such as Philippians and Colossians, on the ground that Paul
himself did not live to participate in the second crisis, the defence of
his doctrine against perversion on the side of mystical, Hellenistic
theosophy. The great Epistles written under the name of Paul from the
period of his captivity are innocent of reference to the developed
Gnostic systems of the second century. They antagonize only an incipient
tendency in this direction.

But while the transition of A.D. 50-150 was both deeper and more complex
than Baur conceived, the transfer of the gospel during that century from
Jewish to Gentile soil is really the great outstanding fact, against
which as a background the literature must be read; and the initial stage
of the process is marked by the controversy of Paul with the Galilean
apostles. What we must call, in distinction from Paulinism, 'apostolic'
Christianity is well represented in the Book of Acts. Paul's writings
show that he felt himself and his churches to represent an independent
type of Christianity in all respects equal to the 'apostolic,' the
problem being unification of the two. Now it is axiomatic that the
investigator must proceed from the relatively known and determinable to
the unknown and disputable. Accordingly it is in reality from the
Epistolary literature of the church, in particular the greater Pauline
Epistles, that he must take his start. As a source for our understanding
of the development of the life of the church the Literature of the
Apostle, directly participant in the conflicts and issues of the times,
even if in its later elements of doubtful or pseudonymous authorship,
takes precedence as a whole over the Literature of the Catechist, with
its later and more or less idealized narration, exemplified in the Book
of Acts.

Modern criticism acknowledges, then, its indebtedness to the Tübingen
school for a clearer definition of both its task and method, by
concentrating attention upon the contrast between the Petrine and the
Pauline conception of 'the gospel.' Still it must be admitted that most
of the inferences first drawn have since been overthrown. In their
chronological scheme of the New Testament writings the Tübingen critics
under-estimated the force of the external evidences (including early
tradition) and misinterpreted the internal. New discovery and more
careful study of literary relations have inverted Baur's views as to
dates of the Johannine writings. Four of these (the Gospel and three
Epistles) are anonymous. Baur's date for these has been forced back by
no less than half a century. The fifth (Revelation) bears the name of
John, but was hotly disputed as pseudonymous in the second century, and
even by its supporters was dated so late as "the end of the reign of
Domitian" (95). The Tübingen school placed Revelation thirty years
earlier, and attributed it to the Apostle. Modern criticism emphatically
reverts to the ancient date, and regards the book as pseudonymous, or as
written by "some other John."

Again the relative dates of the Synoptic writings (Matthew, Mark,
Luke-Acts) were inverted by the Tübingen critics, primarily through
wrong application of their theory of doctrinal development; secondarily,
and as a consequence, through misinterpretation of the intricate
literary relationships. Present-day criticism considers it established
that Mark is the oldest of the three, taken up by each of the other two.
There is almost equal unanimity in regarding the discourse material
common to Matthew and Luke and variously combined by each with Mark, as
independently drawn by them from the book of the "Precepts of the Lord,"
reported by Papias to have been compiled by Matthew "in the Hebrew (_i.
e._ Aramaic) tongue." Tübingen gospel criticism is thus almost entirely
set aside, in favour of the so-called 'Two-document' theory.

So with the Pauline Epistles of the second period. Doubt still clings to
Ephesians. It had been treated by some as pseudo-Pauline even before the
time of Baur; but Baur's own followers soon receded from his extreme
application of his theory to the internal evidence of Philippians,
Colossians and Philemon. It became evident that Paul's "gospel"
included something more than the mere antithesis of Law and Grace. He
had other opponents than the Judaizers, and had to defend his doctrine
against perversion by Grecizing mystics as well as against opposition by
Pharisaic legalists.

Two generations of research and controversy have greatly advanced the
cause of constructive criticism. Hand in hand with a more accurate
dating of the literature, secured through more impartial judgment of
both the external and internal evidence, there has gone a reconstruction
of our conception of the course of events. The tendencies in the early
church were not two only, but four; corresponding, perhaps, to those
rebuked by Paul at Corinth, which called themselves by the names
respectively of Peter, of Paul, of Apollos and of Christ. It seems
probable from the bitterness with which in 2nd Cor. x. 7 Paul denounces
the man who says, "I am of Christ," that this party-cry was employed in
the sense of following the example of Jesus as respects obedience to the
Law (for even Paul acknowledged that Christ had been "made a minister of
the circumcision for the truth of God"). If so, the Corinthian
"Christ-party" may be identified with those "ministers of the
circumcision" who denied both the apostleship and the gospel of Paul. At
all events those "of Cephas" were relatively harmless. They may be
identified with the so-called 'weak' of Romans, for whose scruples on
the score of 'pollutions of idols' Paul demands such consideration both
at Corinth and at Rome. His own adherents both at Corinth (those 'of
Paul') and at Rome (the 'strong') are to follow his example not merely
in recognizing that: "No idol is anything in the world," that "there is
nothing unclean of itself," and that "all things are lawful." It is to
be followed also in recognizing the limitations of this liberty. Limits
are imposed among other things by the scruples of others, so that Paul
himself becomes "as under the Law" when among Jews, though "as without
the Law" among the Gentiles. The "weak" are to be resisted only when the
admission of themselves or their claims would lead to "doubtful
disputations," or to a rebuilding of walls of separation that had been
torn down through faith in Christ. Galatians sounds the battle-cry of
endangered liberty. Corinthians (and Romans in still higher degree)
shows the magnanimity of the victor.

Whether it be possible to identify those "of Apollos" at Corinth with
the beginnings of that Hellenistic perversion of the Pauline gospel into
a mystical theosophy which afterwards passed into Gnosticism may be left
an open question. At least we have come to see that the conditions of
the church's growth were far more complex than Baur imagined. In
particular it is necessary to distinguish four different attitudes on
the single question of the obligation of the Law. There were (1)
Judaizers who insisted on complete submission to the Law as the
condition of salvation, for both Jews and Gentiles; (2) imitators of
Cephas, who considered believers of Jewish birth to be "under the Law,"
but asked of Gentiles only such consideration for it as the special
conditions seemed to require; (3) Paulinists, who held that neither Jews
nor Gentiles are under the law, yet felt that consideration should be
shown for the scrupulous when asked not as of right, but as of charity;
(4) radicals, who recognized no limits to their freedom save the one new
commandment.

But while conflict first broke out over the mere concrete question of
Gentile liberty, the real distinction of Paul's gospel from that of the
older apostles was far deeper. The question as Tübingen critics
conceived it concerned primarily the _extent_ of the gospel message,--to
how large a circle was it offered? Modern criticism has come to see that
the difference was in higher degree a difference of _quality_. Paul's
whole message of redemption through the cross and resurrection started
from other premises than those of the Galilean apostles, and was
conceived in other terms. For this reason it leads over to a new
Christology. In short, the transition of Christianity from its Jewish to
its Gentile form is not a mere enlargement of its field by the abolition
of particularistic barriers. The background we must study for the
understanding of it is not so much mere contemporary history as the
contemporary history _of religion_. The development from the Petrine
gospel broadly characteristic of the Synoptic writings, through the
Pauline Epistles to that of the Johannine writings, is a transition from
Hebrew to Hellenistic conceptions of what redemption is, and how it is
effected. Modern criticism expresses the contrast in its distinction of
the gospel _of_ Jesus from the gospel _about_ Jesus.

In the case of both Paul and his predecessors in the faith there is a
common starting-point. It was the doctrine that God had raised Jesus
from the dead and exalted Him as Christ and Lord to the throne of glory.
Its proofs were the ecstatic phenomena of the Spirit, those strange
manifestations of 'prophecy,' 'tongues,' and the like in the Christian
assembly. The inference from this resurrection faith for an apostle of
the Galilean group was that he must "teach all men everywhere to observe
all things whatsoever Jesus had commanded." Jesus had been raised up in
Israel as the Prophet like unto Moses; His apostle must repeat the
remembered word of commandment and the word of promise. He will have an
authority derived from the manifestations of signs and wonders. These
had accompanied Jesus' own career, and now, by grace of His endowment of
His disciples with the Spirit, they will be repeated by their hands.
The 'apostolic' gospel is thus primarily historical. The Pauline gospel
centres at the other pole of religious conviction. It is primarily
psychological. For Paul the immediate effect of the revelation of God's
Son "in" him is an irresistible impulse to relate his own soul's
experience. The gospel he preaches is not so much what Jesus did or said
while on earth, as what God has done, and is still doing, through the
"life-giving Spirit" which emanates from the risen Lord. Signs and
wonders are tokens of the Spirit, but are of less value, and must vanish
before the "abiding" ethical gifts. Both the Pauline and the Petrine
gospel start from the common confession of "Jesus as Lord"; but the
Christology of the Synoptic literature is an Apotheosis doctrine,
falling back on the historical Jesus. That of the Epistles is a doctrine
of Incarnation, appealing to the eternal manifestation of God in man.
For the former, Jesus was "a prophet mighty in deed and word," raised up
by God in accordance with the promise of Deut. xviii. 18, to turn Israel
to repentance. Having fulfilled this mission in rejection and martyrdom
Jesus had been exalted to God's "right hand" and "made both Lord and
Christ." He there awaits the subjection of all His enemies. In the
Pauline gospel the story of Jesus is a drama of the supernal regions,
wherein His earthly career as prophet, leader, teacher, sinks to the
level of the merest episode. As pre-existent spirit, Jesus had been
from the beginning of the creation "in the form of God." As the period
of its consummation drew near He took upon Him human form, descended
through suffering and death to the lowest depths of the underworld, and
by divine power had reascended above all the heavens with their ranks of
angelic hierarchies. Whether Paul himself so conceived it or not, the
Gentile world had no other moulds of thought wherein to formulate such a
Christology than the current myths of Redeemer-gods. The value of the
individual _soul_ had at last been discovered, and men resorted to the
ancient personifications of the forces of nature as deliverers of this
new-found _soul_ from its weakness and mortality. The influential
religions of the time were those of personal redemption by mystic union
with a dying and resurrected "Saviour-god," an Osiris, an Adonis, an
Attis, a Mithra. Religions of this type were everywhere displacing the
old national faiths. The Gentile could not think of "the Christ"
primarily as a Son of David who restores the kingdom to Israel, shatters
the Gentiles like a potter's vessel and rules them with a rod of iron.
If he employed this Old Testament language at all, it had for him a
purely symbolical sense. The whole conception was spiritualized. The
"enemies" overcome were the spiritual foes of humanity, sin and death;
"redemption" was not the deliverance of Israel out of the hand of all
their enemies, that (together with all afar off that call upon the name
of this merciful God) they may "serve Him in holiness and righteousness
all their days." It was the rescue of the sons of Adam out of the
bondage to evil Powers incurred through inheritance of Adam's sinful
flesh. This had been the tendency already of Jewish apocalypse. The
starting-point of Paul's own conceptions was not Israel's bondage in
Egypt, but a conception already tinged, like the late book of Jewish
philosophy called the Wisdom of Solomon, with the Stoic conception of
'flesh' as prison-house of 'spirit,' already inflamed, like the
contemporary Jewish apocalypses of Esdras and Baruch, with lurid visions
of a universe rescued by superhuman power from a thraldom of demonic
rule. Paul's preaching was made real by his own experience. For if ever
there was an evangelist whose message was his own experience, Paul was
such. And Paul's experience was not so much that of a Palestinian Jew,
as that of a Hellenist, one whose whole idea of 'redemption' has been
unconsciously universalized, individualized, and spiritualized, by
contact with Greek and Hellenistic thought. Paul and the Galilean
apostles were not far apart in their expectations of the future. Both
stood gazing up into heaven. But for his authority Paul inevitably
looked inwards, the Galilean apostles looked backwards.

It is hopeless at the present stage of acquaintance with the history of
religion, particularly the spread of the various 'mysteries' and
religions of personal redemption in the early empire, to deny this
contrast between the gospel of Paul and the gospel of "the apostles and
elders at Jerusalem." It is shortsighted to overlook its significance in
the transition of the faith. Whereas the Jewish-Christian had as its
principal background the national history, more or less
transcendentalized in the forms of apocalypse, Paul's had as its
principal background the speculative mythology of the Hellenistic world,
more or less adapted to the forms of Judaism. Only ignorance of the
function of mythology, especially as then employed to express the
aspiration of the soul for purity, life and fellowship with God, can
make these mythologically framed religious ideas seem an inappropriate
vehicle to convey Paul's sense of the significance of Jesus' message and
life of "Son ship." They were at least the best expression those times
and that environment could afford of the greater Kingdom God had
proclaimed in the resurrection of the Christ, and was bringing to pass
through the outpouring of His Spirit.

Modern criticism must therefore recognize that the beginnings of our
religion were not a mere enlargement of Judaism by abolition of the
barriers of the Law, but a fusion of the two great streams of religious
thought distinctive of the Jewish and the Hellenistic world in a higher
unity. Alexander's hoped-for "marriage of Europe and Asia" was
consummated at last in the field of religion itself. Denationalized
Judaism contributed the social ideal: the messianic hope of a world-wide
Kingdom of God. It is the worthy contribution of a highly ethical
national religion. Hellenism contributed the individual ideal: personal
redemption in mystic union with the life of God. It is a concept derived
from the Greek's newly-awakened consciousness of a personality agonizing
for deliverance out of the bondage of the material and transitory, alien
and degrading to its proper life. The critic who has become a historian
of ideas will find his study of the literature of the apostolic and
post-apostolic age here widening out into a prospect of unsuspected
largeness and significance. He will see as the two great divisions of
his subject, (1) the gospel _of_ Jesus, represented, as we are told, in
the first beginnings of literary development by an Aramaic compilation
of the Precepts of the Lord by the Apostle Matthew, circulating possibly
even before the great Pauline Epistles among the Palestinian churches;
(2) the gospel _about_ Jesus, represented in the Pauline Epistles, and
these based on their author's personal experience. It is a gospel of
God's action "in Christ, reconciling the world." It interprets the
personality of Jesus and his experience of the cross and resurrection
as manifestations of the divine idea. The interpretation employs
Hellenistically coloured forms of thought, and is forced to vindicate
itself first against subjection to legalism, afterwards against
perversion into an unethical, superstitious theosophy. But surely the
doctrine _about_ Jesus, interpreting the significance of His person and
work as the culmination of redemption through the indwelling of God in
men and among men belongs as much to the essence of Christianity as the
gospel of love and faith proclaimed _by_ Jesus.

Besides these two principal types of gospel and their subordinate
combinations the critical historian may see ultimately emerging a type
of 'spiritual' gospel, growing upon Gentile soil, in fact, receiving its
first literary expression in the early years of the second century at
the very headquarters of the Pauline mission-field. This third type aims
to be comprehensive of the other two. It is essentially a gospel about
Jesus, though it takes the form for its main literary expression of a
gospel preached by Jesus. The fourth evangelist is the true successor of
Paul, though the conditions of the age compel him to go beyond the
literary form of the Epistle and to construct a Gospel wherein both
factors of the sacred tradition shall appear, the words and works, the
Precepts and the Saving Ministry of Jesus. But it is in no mechanical or
slavish sense that the fourth evangelist appeals to this supreme
authority. He lifts the whole message above the level of mere baptized
legalism, even while he guards it against the unbridled licence of
Gnostic theosophy, applying to this purpose his doctrine of the
Incarnate Logos. His basis is psychology as well as history. It is the
Life which is the light of men, that life whose source is God, and which
permeates and redeems His creation; even "the eternal Life which was
with the Father and was manifested to us."

In the critical grouping of our New Testament writings the Gospel and
Epistles of John can occupy, then, no lesser place than that of the
keystone of the arch.

To sum up: the Literature of the Apostle owed its early development and
long continuance among the Pauline churches of Asia Minor and Greece, to
the impetus and example of Paul's apostolic authority. The Literature of
the Teacher and Prophet, growing up around Jerusalem and its daughter
churches at Antioch and Rome, came slowly to surpass in influence the
"commandment of the apostles," as the church became more and more
exclusively dependent upon it for the "teaching of the Lord." It was the
function of the great "theologian" of Ephesus (as he came early to be
called), linking the authority of both, to furnish the fundamental basis
for the catholic faith.




PART II

THE LITERATURE OF THE APOSTLE


CHAPTER III

PAUL AS MISSIONARY AND DEFENDER OF THE GOSPEL OF GRACE


Most vital of all passages for historical appreciation of the great
period of Paul's missionary activity and its literature is the
retrospect over his career as apostle to the Gentiles and defender of a
gospel "without the yoke of the Law" in Gal. i.-ii. Especially must the
contrast be observed between this and the very different account in Acts
ix.-xvi.

Galatians aims to counteract the encroachments of certain Judaizing
interlopers upon Paul's field, and seems to have been written from
Corinth, shortly after his arrival there (_c._ 50) on the Second
Missionary Journey (Acts xv. 36--xviii. 22). We take "the churches of
Galatia" to be those founded by Paul in company with Barnabas on the
First Missionary Journey (Acts xiii.-xiv.), and revisited with Silas
after a division of the recently evangelized territory whereby Cyprus
had been left to Barnabas and Mark (Acts xv. 36--xvi. 5; _cf._ Gal. iv.
13).

The retrospect is in two parts: (1) a proof of the divine origin of
Paul's apostleship and gospel by the independence of his conversion and
missionary career; (2) an account of his defence of his "gospel of
uncircumcision" on the two occasions when it had been threatened.
Visiting Jerusalem for the second time some fifteen years[7] after his
conversion, he secured from its "pillars," James, Peter, and John, an
unqualified, though "private," endorsement. At Antioch subsequently he
overcame renewed opposition by public exposure of the inconsistency of
Peter, who had been won over by the reactionaries.

    Footnote 7: Or perhaps thirteen. Gal. ii. 1 may reckon from the
    conversion (31-33). In both periods (Gal. i. 18, and ii. 1) both
    termini are counted.

Acts reverses Paul's point of view, making his career in the period of
unobstructed evangelization one of labour for Jews alone, in complete
dependence on the Twelve. It practically excludes the period of
opposition by a determination of the Gentile status in an 'Apostolic
Council.' Paul is represented as simply acquiescing in this decision.

As described by Paul, the whole earlier period of fifteen years had been
occupied by missionary effort for _Gentiles_, first at Damascus,
afterwards "in the regions of Syria and Cilicia." It was interrupted
only by a journey "to Arabia," and later, three years after his
conversion, by a two-weeks' private visit to Peter in Jerusalem. In this
period must fall most of the journeys and adventures of 2nd Cor. xi.
23-33. It was practically without contact with Judæa. His "gospel" was
what God alone had taught him through an inward manifestation of the
risen Jesus.

As described by Luke[8] the whole period was spent in the evangelization
of Greek-speaking _Jews_, principally at Jerusalem. This was Paul's
chosen field, worked under direction of "the apostles." Only against his
will[9] was he driven for refuge to Tarsus, whence Barnabas, who had
first introduced him to the apostles, brought him to Antioch. There was
no Gentile mission until Barnabas and he were by that church made its
'apostles.' This mission was on express direction of "the Spirit" (Acts
ix. 19-30; xi. 25 f.; xiii. 1-3; _cf._ xxii. 10-21). Paul's
apostleship to the Gentiles begins, then, according to Luke, with the
First Missionary Journey, when in company with (and at first in
subordination to) Barnabas he evangelizes Cyprus and southern Galatia.
The two are agents of Antioch, with "letters of commendation" from "the
apostles and elders in Jerusalem" (Acts xv. 23-26). Paul is not an
apostle of Christ in the same sense as the Twelve (_cf._ Acts i. 21
f.). He is a providential "vessel of the Spirit," ordained "by men and
through men." His gospel is Peter's unaltered (_cf._ Acts xxvi. 16-23).

    Footnote 8: We apply the name to the writer of Luke-Acts without
    prejudice to the question of authorship.

    Footnote 9: Acts xxii. 10-21 is not quite consistent with xxvi.
    15-18; but the general sense is clear.

There is even wider disparity regarding the period of opposition. Luke
slightly postpones its beginning and very greatly antedates its
suppression. Moreover, he makes Paul accept a solution which his letters
emphatically repudiate.

According to Acts there was no opposition before the First Missionary
Journey, for the excellent reason that there had been no Gentile
propaganda.[10] There was no opposition after the Council called to
consider it (Acts xv.), for the conclusive reason that "the apostles and
elders" left nothing to dispute about. As soon as the objections were
raised the church in Antioch laid the question before these authorities,
sending Paul and Barnabas to testify. On their witness to the grace of
God among the Gentiles, Peter (explicitly claiming for himself (!) this
special apostleship, Acts xv. 7) proposes unconditional acknowledgment
of Gentile liberty, referring to the precedent of Cornelius. In this
there was general acquiescence. In fact the matter had really been
decided before (Acts xi. 1-18). The only wholly new point was that
raised by James in behalf of "the Jews among the Gentiles" (Acts xv. 21;
_cf._ xxi. 21). For their sake it is held "necessary" to limit Gentile
freedom on four points. They must abstain from three prohibited meats,
and from fornication, for these convey the "pollution of idols." The
"necessity" lies in the fact that _liberty from the Law is not conceded
to Jews_. They will be (involuntarily) defiled if they eat with their
Gentile brethren unprotected. "Fornication" is added because (in the
words of an ancient Jewish Christian) it "differs from all other sins in
that it defiles not only the sinner, but those also _who eat or
associate with him_." Paul and Barnabas, according to Luke, gladly
accepted these "decrees," and Paul distributed them "for to keep" among
his converts in Galatia (!). _Peter_ is the apostle to the Gentiles.
Antioch and Jerusalem decide the question of their status. The terms of
fellowship are those of _James_ and Peter.

    Footnote 10: Cornelius' case (Acts x.-xi. 18) is exceptional, and no
    propaganda follows. The reading "Greeks" in Acts xi. 20, though
    required by the sense and therefore adopted by the English
    translators, is not supported by the textual evidence. Luke has here
    corrected his source to suit his theory, just as in x. 1--xi. 18 he
    passes by the true significance of the story, which really deals
    with the question of _eating_ with Gentiles (xi. 3, 7 f.).

Paul has no mention of either Council or 'decrees.' His terms of
fellowship positively exclude both. He falls back upon the private
Conference, and lays bare a story of agonizing struggle to make
effective its recognition of the equality and independence of Gentile
Christianity. The struggle is a result of his resistance to emissaries
"from James" at Antioch, who had brought over all the Jewish element in
that mixed church, including Peter and "even Barnabas" to terms of
fellowship acceptable to the Pillars. After the collision at Antioch
Paul leaves the "regions of Syria and Cilicia," and transfers the scene
of his missionary efforts to the Greek world between the Taurus range
and the Adriatic. For the next ten years we see him on the one side
conducting an independent mission, proclaiming the doctrine of the Cross
as inaugurating a new era, wherein law has been done away, and Jew and
Gentile have "access in one Spirit unto the Father." On the other he is
defending this gospel of 'grace' against unscrupulous Jewish-Christian
traducers, and labouring to reconcile differences between his own
followers and those of 'the circumcision' who are not actively hostile,
but only have taken 'offence.' Throughout the period, until the arrest
in Jerusalem which ends his career as an evangelist, Paul stands alone
as champion of unrestricted Gentile liberty and equality. He cannot
admit terms of fellowship which imply a continuance of the legal
dispensation. Jewish Christians may keep circumcision and the customs if
they wish; but may not hold or recommend them as conferring the
slightest advantage in God's sight. He will not admit the doctrine of
salvation by faith _with_ works of law. Jew as well as Gentile must have
"died to the Law." There is no "justification" except "by faith _apart_
from works of law."[11]

    Footnote 11: The assertion has recently been made in very high
    quarters on the basis of 1st Cor. vii. 18 that Paul also took the
    "apostolic" view that the Christian of Jewish birth remains under
    obligation to keep the law. One would think Paul had not added verse
    19!

Unless we distinctly apprehend the deep difference, almost casually
brought out by this question of the (converted) Jew among Gentiles and
his obligation to eat with his Gentile brother, a difference between
'apostolic' Christianity as Luke gives it, and the 'gospel' of Paul, we
can have no adequate appreciation of the great Epistles produced during
this period of conflict. The basis of Luke's pleasing picture of peace
and concord is a fundamentally different conception of the relation of
Law and Grace. Paul and Luke both hold that the Mosaic commandments are
not binding on _Gentiles_. The point of difference--and Paul's own
account of his Conference with the Pillars goes to show that Luke's idea
is also theirs; else why need there be a division of 'spheres of
influence'?--is Paul's doctrine that the believing Jew _as well as the
Gentile_ is "dead to the Law." And this doctrine was never accepted
south of the Taurus range.

Agreement and union were sure to come, if only by the rapid
disappearance from the church after 70 A.D. of the element of the
circumcised, and the progressive realization in 'Syria and Cilicia' of
the impracticability of the Jerusalem-Antioch plan of requiring Gentiles
to make their tables innocuous to the legalist. If only the
participation of Paul and Barnabas be excluded from the story of Acts
xv. (or better, restored to its proper sequence after Acts xi. 30) we
have every reason to accept Luke's account of an Apostolic Council held
at Jerusalem not long after "Peter came to Antioch" to settle between
the churches of northern and southern Syria the knotty question of the
Christian Jew's eating or not eating with Gentiles. It is almost certain
that Syria did adopt this modus vivendi for "the brethren which are of
the Gentiles _in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia_" (Acts xv. 23); for we can
trace its gradual obsolescence there. In Revelation (a book of
Palestinian origin republished at Ephesus _c._ 95; _cf._ Rev. ii. 14,
20, 24) in the _Teaching of the Twelve_ (125), and in the 'Western' text
of Acts xv. (150?) there is a progressive scaling down of the 'burden.'
Gentiles are at last asked to do almost nothing more than Paul had
demanded on moral grounds without recognition of the validity of
"distinctions of meats." In A.D. 120 the 'burden' is: "Concerning meats,
keep what thou art able; however, abstain at all events from things
offered to idols, for it is the food of dead gods."

But to take Luke's account of how peace was restored, with its
implication that the Pauline gospel as developed in Greek Christendom
between the Taurus range and the Adriatic was nothing more than a branch
from the parent stock of the 'apostolic' church in "Syria and Cilicia,"
would be like viewing the history of the United States from the
standpoint of a British imperialist of a period of Anglo-Saxon reunion
in A.D. 2000, who should omit entirely the American War of Independence,
holding that Washington and Franklin after bearing testimony before
Parliament accepted for the colonies a plan of settlement prepared by a
Liberal Government which reduced to a minimum the obnoxious requirements
of the Tories.

The history of this period of the development of the independent
'gospel' of Paul and of his independent churches is so vital, and so
confused by generations of well-meaning 'harmonizers,' that we must take
time to contrast once more Luke's theory of the process of reunion with
Paul's.

_In Acts Paul takes precisely the view of Peter and James._ He is
himself 'under the Law.' He does _not_ disregard it even among Gentiles.
On the contrary, he sets an example of scrupulous legality to the Jews
among the Gentiles, himself 'walking orderly, keeping the Law.' The
statement that he "teaches them to forsake Moses, telling them not to
circumcise their children, nor to obey the customs" is a calumny (!)
which he takes public occasion to disprove (Acts xxi. 20-26). Before the
Sanhedrin he emphatically declares himself a consistent Pharisee (Acts
xxiii. 1, 6); before Felix and Festus, blameless by the standard of Law
and Prophets (xxiv. 14-16; xxv. 8); before Agrippa, a strict Pharisee in
his conduct hitherto (xxvi. 5, 22 f.). Titus, whose circumcision Paul
strenuously resisted, is never mentioned in Acts. Conversely Timothy (a
Jew only on his mother's side) Paul "took and circumcised" immediately
after the Jerusalem Council "because of the Jews that were in those
parts" (Galatia!). His visit with Barnabas to Jerusalem is not
occasioned by opposition to Gentile missions, though it falls between
Barnabas' mission from Jerusalem to investigate the alarming reports of
Gentile conversions at Antioch, and the First Missionary Journey on
which the two take with them Mark, who had accompanied them from
Jerusalem. No; according to Luke Gentile missions did not yet
exist[12](!). This visit (that of the Conference, Gal. ii. 1-10) was
merely to convey a gift from the Antioch church to that of Jerusalem
because of the famine "about that time" (it occurred in 46-47).
Conversely the great 'offering of the Gentiles' made at the risk of
Paul's life in company with delegates from each province of his field,
as a proffer of peace, the enterprise which occupies so large a place in
his effort and his letters of this period (1st Cor. xvi. 1-6; 2nd Cor.
8-9; Rom. xv. 15, 16, 25-32), has in Acts no relation to the
controversy--for the demonstration of Paul's exemplary legalism in the
temple is merely incidental. The gift Paul brought was "alms to my
nation" (!) (Acts xxiv. 17). The reader asks in vain what necessitates
this dangerous journey. The only motives assigned are a Nazarite vow
assumed in Cenchreæ (xviii. 18; xxi. 24), and regard for the Jewish
feasts (xx. 16).

    Footnote 12: On the reading "Greeks" in Acts xi. 20 see Footnote 10
    above., p. 59.

The background of history against which the modern reader must place the
great letters of Paul of the first period, is manifestly something quite
different from the mere unsifted story of Acts. Their real origin is in
a profound difference in Paul's idea of 'the gospel' and the necessity
of defending the independence of it and of the Gentile churches founded
on it. The difference originates in Paul's own religious experience. It
found its first expression in his antithesis of Law and Grace, his
doctrine that the cross marks the abolition of the economy of Law.

Both in Galatians and everywhere else Paul treats on equal terms with
the representatives of the "apostleship of the circumcision." He
denounces Peter and "the rest of the Jews," including "even Barnabas,"
at Antioch, after they have withdrawn from Gentile fellowship in order
to preserve their legal 'cleanness,' and the point of the denunciation
is that this is inconsistent with _their_ (implied) abandonment of the
Law as a means of salvation when they "sought to be justified by faith
in Christ." This makes their conduct not only inconsistent but cowardly
and "hypocritical."

Here is something far deeper than a mere question of policy. Paul's
attitude shows that from the beginning he has really been preaching "a
different gospel." A gospel _about_ Christ in which the central fact is
the cross as the token of the abolition of a dispensation of Law wherein
Jew and Gentile alike were in a servile relation to God, under angelic
(or demonic) "stewards and governors," and the inauguration of a
dispensation of Grace, wherein all who have 'faith' and receive in
baptism the gift of 'the Spirit,' are thereby adopted to be God's sons.
Beside this cosmic drama of the cross and resurrection wherein God
reveals his redemptive purpose for the world, the mere inculcation of
the easy yoke of Jesus as a new Law, simplifying and supplementing the
old by restoring the doctrine of forgiveness for the repentant believer
(_cf._ Matt. xxviii. 20; Acts x. 42 f.; xiii. 39; xxvi. 22 f.) seems
only half a gospel.

Paul can never surrender the independence of his God-given message, nor
the liberty wherewith Christ has made all believers free in abolishing
the economy of law and making them "sons" by the Spirit. And yet he is
even more determined to achieve peace and reunion than the apostles 'of
the circumcision'; only he has a different plan. Paul and his churches
fall back upon the Jerusalem Conference, not upon the 'Apostolic
Council.' The Conference is their Magna Carta. Its recognition of
Paul's independent gospel and apostleship as no less divine than Peter's
is their guarantee of liberty and equality; its request for brotherly
aid is their promise of fraternity.

Approaches were made on both sides. It is true the ill-advised attempt
of the Judaizers to secure unity by a renewal of their propaganda of the
Law, seducing the Greek churches from their loyalty to Paul and his
gospel, provoked from him only such thunderbolts as Galatians, with its
defence of "the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free," or 2nd Cor.
x. 1 to xiii. 10, with its denunciation of the "ministers of Satan."
Peace through surrender was not to Paul's mind. But the sincere attempt
of the followers of Peter to find a _modus vivendi_, even if they did
not venture to claim liberty from the Law for themselves, found Paul
prepared to go more than half-way. His epistles are not more remarkable
for their strenuous defence of the liberty of Son ship, than for their
insistence on the obligation of brotherly love. His churches must be not
only morally pure for their own sakes, but must avoid offences to the
more scrupulous. Even that which Christian liberty allows must be
sacrificed to the scruples of the 'weak,' if only it be not "unto
doubtful disputations," or demanded as of right. From 1st Thessalonians
(Corinth, A.D. 50), where, in the absence of all Judaizing opposition
Paul merely exhibits his simple gospel of the resurrection and judgment
to come, unaffected by questions of Law and Grace, on through Galatians
with its sublime polemic for the liberty of sons, to the Corinthian
correspondence, with its insistence on the duty of consideration and
forbearance, its stronger note of love, its revelation of the
widespread, strenuous exertions of Paul to promote his great 'offering,'
down to Romans, where the 'offering of the Gentiles' is ready to be made
(Rom. xv. 16-33), and Paul is sedulously preparing to enter a great new
field already partially occupied, by presenting a full and superlatively
conciliatory statement of his entire 'gospel' (i. 15-17), there is
steady progress toward the "peace" and "acceptance" which he hopes to
find in Jerusalem. The later Epistles, with their different phase of
conflict, the very attitude of 'apostolic' Christianity toward Paul, as
exhibited in Acts, make it incredible that substantial unity was not in
fact secured.[13] We cannot, indeed, accept Luke's representation of
Paul as performing the Nazarite ceremonial in the temple in order to
prove _that he does not teach that the Law is not binding on Jews_. But
it does not follow that Paul may not have done even this to prove that
his principle of accommodation to the weak (1st Cor. ix. 19-22) left
ample room for fellowship with the Jewish Christian--except when (as
with Peter and Barnabas at Antioch) the needless scruples of the
legalist were made a pretext for "compelling the Gentiles to live as do
the Jews."

    Footnote 13: The actual outcome is seen in the reduction of the
    'burden' to the two items of abstinence from "fornication and from
    things offered to idols." Paul's nicer distinctions under the latter
    head (1st Cor. viii. 1-13, x. 14-23) as well as his distinction
    between the ceremonial and the moral grounds for abstinence, were
    disregarded.

Had unity been attained through the simple process imagined by Luke,
obedient acquiescence of Paul and the Gentiles in the divinely inspired
verdict of "the apostles and elders in Jerusalem," Christianity would
have been an immeasurably poorer thing than it became. Indeed, it is
questionable whether a gospel of mere simplification, extension and
supplementation of the Law would ever have made permanent conquest of
the Gentile world. It is because Paul stood out on this question of
'meats' for the equal right of his independent gospel, refusing
submission until his great ten-years' work of evangelization by tongue
and pen had made Gentile Christianity a factor of at least equal
importance with Jewish, that our religion was enriched by its
Hellenistic strain. The deeper insight into the real significance of
Jesus' work and fate born of Paul's peculiar experience and his
Hellenistic apprehension of the gospel found embodiment in the
beginnings of a New Testament literature. The writings of this period
must accordingly be viewed against the background of a critical history.
Luke's account, written in the interest of "apostolic" authority, must
receive such modifications as the contemporary documents require.

Taking up the story at the point of divergence we see Paul and Barnabas
returning to Antioch after the Conference with the Pillars, glad at
heart, and expecting now to resume the work for Gentiles without
impediment. Besides Titus, John Mark of Jerusalem, a nephew of Barnabas,
accompanied them. The Missionary Journey to Cyprus and (southern)
Galatia follows, Mark returning, however, to Jerusalem after leaving
Cyprus.

It was probably during the absence of the missionaries that "Peter came
to Antioch" and, at first, followed the Pauline practice of disregarding
'distinctions of meats.' Later, on arrival of certain "from James" he
"drew back and separated himself, fearing those of the circumcision."
While matters were at this stage Paul and Barnabas reappeared on the
scene. Paul thought it necessary to rebuke Peter "openly, before them
all." Barnabas, former head of the Antioch church, took sides with Peter
and "the rest of the Jews," doubtless determining the attitude of the
church; for Paul says nothing of prevailing upon them by his argument,
but merely turns it at once upon the Galatians themselves. Moreover,
Barnabas now takes Cyprus as his mission field, with Mark as his helper,
while Paul with a new companion, Silvanus (in Acts "Silas," a bearer of
the 'decrees' from Jerusalem), takes the northern half of the newly
evangelized territory, and through much difficulty and opposition makes
his way to the coasts of the Ægean.

This second visit to the churches of Galatia (Acts xvi. 1-5) was
signalized by warnings against the (possible) preaching of "another
gospel" (Gal. i. 9); for Paul had reason to anticipate trouble from the
"false brethren." If Acts may be believed, it was also marked by an
extraordinary evidence of Paul's readiness to "become all things to all
men" in the interest of conciliation. He is said to have circumcised a
Galatian half-Jew named Timothy. If so, it was certainly not to prove
his respect for the legal requirement, but rather its indifference.
"Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision nothing; only faith working
through love." But these generous 'accommodations' of Paul produced more
of misrepresentation than of conciliation. He had cause to regret his
liberality later (Gal. i. 10; v. 11 f.; _cf._ 1st Cor. vii. 18).

Some unexplained obstacle (Acts xvi. 6) prevented Paul's entrance into
the Province of Asia at this time. Ephesus, his probable objective, had
perhaps already been occupied (xviii. 24-28). He turned north through
Phrygia-Galatia, hoping to find a field in Bithynia, but was again
disappointed. At Troas, the very extremity of Asia, came the
turning-point in the fortunes of the missionaries. Encouraged by a
vision they crossed into Macedonia and found fields white for the
harvest.

The Epistles to Thessalonica address one of these Macedonian churches
from Corinth, whither the missionaries have been driven. Timothy had
been sent back from Athens when Paul's own repeated attempts to return
had been frustrated, and has just arrived with good news of the church's
perseverance in spite of a persecution stirred up by the Jews. It is
against these, apparently, not against Jewish-Christian detractors, that
Paul defends his character and message (1st Thess. ii. 1-13). There is
also an urgent warning against fornication (iv. 1-8) and exhortation to
abound in love (iv. 9-12), with correction of the natural Greek tendency
to misapprehend the Jewish eschatology and resurrection-doctrine (iv.
13--v. 1-11; _cf._ 1st Cor. xv.). The closing admonitions relate to the
direction of church meetings and discipline.

2nd Thessalonians corrects and supplements the eschatology of 1st
Thessalonians by adding a doctrine of Antichrist, which is at all events
thoroughly Jewish and earlier than 70, when the temple was destroyed in
which it expects the manifestation of "the man of sin." It is the only
one of the Epistles of this period whose authenticity is seriously
questioned by critical scholarship. How little this affects the question
of Paul's 'gospel' may be seen by the fact that the entire contents
cover less than 3 per cent. of the earlier Epistles, while the subject
is a mere detail.

Far more significant is it to observe the close correspondence between
the missionary preaching of Paul as here described by himself (1st
Thess. i. 9 f.) and the general apostolic message (_kerygma_) as
described by Luke (Acts x. 42 f.; xiv. 15-17; xvii. 24-31). Where
there are no Judaizers there is no reference to the dispensations of Law
and Grace and the abolition of the former in the Cross. The doctrine is
the common gospel of the Resurrection, wherein Jesus has been manifested
as the Messiah. Faith in him secures forgiveness to the repentant; all
others are doomed to perish in the judgment shown by his 'manifestation'
to be at hand (_cf._ 1st Cor. xv. 11; Rom. i. 3-5).

Galatians was written but slightly before (or after?) the letters to
Thessalonica. Its single theme (after the retrospect) is the Adoption to
Son ship through the Spirit. Against the Judaizer's plea that to share
in the Inheritance one must be adopted (preferably by circumcision) into
the family of Abraham, or at all events pay respect to the Mosaic Law,
Paul asserts the single fact of the adoption of the Spirit. "It is
because ye are sons that God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts crying (in the ecstatic utterances of 'tongues') Abba, that is,
Father" (Gal. iv. 6). To go back to legal observances is to revert from
redemption to bondage. All Christians are indeed sons of Abraham, but
only as sharers of his trust in God. Abraham was made "heir of the
world" (Rom. iv. 13) for his faith. Circumcision and the Law came
afterwards. They were not superimposed stipulations and conditions of
the promise. On the contrary they were temporary pedagogic measures
intended to produce the consciousness of sin and (moral) death, so that
when the Heir should come men should be ready to cast themselves on the
mercy of God displayed in his vicarious death.[14] Thus the messianic
Redemption is a redemption from a system issuing in sin and death. On
the cross even the sinless Christ incurred the curse in order that
believers thus redeemed might have the Blessing of the Abrahamic promise
(Gal. iii. 1--iv. 7).

    Footnote 14: Romans enlarges the conception of the economy of Law by
    making it include the Gentile law of 'conscience' (Rom. i. 18--ii.
    16). In Galatians this point is covered only by classing the
    "angels" through whom the Mosaic Law was given, with the "Elements"
    honoured in Gentile religion. Both are codes of "stewards and
    governors."

But this transfer from bondage to liberty, from the legal to the filial
relation, does not "make Christ a minister of sin." On the contrary, if
the delivering Spirit of Son ship has been received at all, it controls
the life for purity and love. One cannot be a son and be unfilial or
unbrotherly. The unity of the redeemed world in Christ is the unity of
loving service, not of subjection to a bygone system of rules (iv.
8--vi. 18). Thus does Galatians meet the insidious plea of the
Judaizers, and their charges against Pauline liberty.

The church founded by Paul in Corinth (Acts xviii. 1-17) was grounded
from the beginning in this doctrine of the Cross. Paul purposely
restricted himself to it (1st Cor. i. 17-25; ii. 1-5). He had indeed a
world-view, of which we learn more in the Epistles of the Captivity, a
philosophy revealed by the Spirit as a "mystery of God." Those who
afterwards in Corinth came to call themselves followers "of Apollos" had
nothing to teach him on this score. But consideration of this Grecizing
tendency, too often issuing in a mere "philosophy and vain deceit after
the Elements of the world and not after Christ" (Col. ii. 8), must be
deferred, in favour of questions which became more immediately pressing.
For after Paul had left Corinth to make a brief visit via Ephesus to
Cæsarea and Antioch, and had returned through the now pacified Galatian
churches to make Ephesus his permanent headquarters (Acts xviii. 18-23),
he received disturbing news of conditions in Corinth. Under Apollos (now
at Ephesus with Paul) an Alexandrian convert thoroughly indoctrinated
with Paul's gospel (Acts xviii. 24-28) the church had flourished, but
discussions had subsequently arisen, resulting in a letter to Paul
asking his advice on disputed points. Besides this there were moral
blemishes. First the factious strife itself, of which Paul has learnt
from newcomers from Corinth; secondly a case of unpunished incest. A
previous letter from Paul (now lost, or but partially preserved in 2nd
Cor. vi. 14--vii. 1) had required the church "to have no company with
fornicators." The church, making the application general, had pleaded
the impracticability of "going out of the world." Paul now explains: "If
any man _that is named a brother_ be a fornicator ... with such a one
no, not to eat." After further rebuke for litigiousness, and a lack of
moral tone, especially in the matter of "fornication" (ch. vi.), Paul
takes up seriatim "the things whereof ye wrote." We are chiefly
interested in the long section (viii. 1--xi. 1) on "things offered to
idols" wherein Paul instructs those who would be imitators of his
freedom, but who forget that he has always refused to assert his rights
when thereby the 'weak' were stumbled. Moreover fornication is never
among the permissible things, nor even the eating of meats offered to
idols _at the heathen banquet itself_. Such food is unobjectionable only
when it has been sold in the market, and can be eaten without 'offence.'

The other questions related to church meetings for the "Lord's supper"
and the exercise of "spiritual gifts." They give opportunity for the
development of Paul's noble doctrine of unity through loving service
(xi. 2--xiv. 40). The doctrinal section of 1st Corinthians concludes
with a full statement of Paul's doctrine of the resurrection body
(called forth by Greek objections to the Jewish). From the items of
business at the close we learn that "the collection for the saints" has
been under way some time already "in Galatia," and that Paul hopes,
after passing through Macedonia, to join the delegation which is to
carry the money to Jerusalem (xvi. 1-6).

As it turned out Paul actually followed the itinerary outlined in 1st
Cor. xvi. 1-6, but not until after distressing experiences. Timothy,
sent (by way of Macedonia, Acts xix. 22) as Paul's representative (iv.
17; xvi. 10 f.), was unable to restore order. The opposition to Paul's
apostolic authority, treated almost contemptuously in ix. 1-14, grew to
alarming proportions. Paul received so direct and personal an affront
(either on a hasty visit undertaken in person from Ephesus, or in the
person of Timothy) that he despatched a peremptory ultimatum, whose
effect he is anxiously waiting to hear when 2nd Corinthians opens with
Paul driven out from Ephesus, a refugee in Macedonia (_c._ 55). It is
highly probable that the disconnected section appended between 2nd Cor.
ix. 15 and the Farewell, is taken from this "grievous" letter written
"out of much affliction and anguish of heart with many tears" (2nd Cor.
ii. 1-4; vii. 8-16); for it was not only a peremptory demand for
punishment of the offender, but also a letter of forced
self-commendation. Paul cannot have written in self-commendation on more
than one occasion, and he promises not to repeat this in iii. 1 ff. We
may take 2nd Cor. x.-xiii., then, as representing the "grievous" letter.
The opposition emanates from Judaizers who say they are "of Christ," and
may therefore be identical with those of 1st Cor. i. 12. But it has
grown to proportions which for a time made Paul despair of the church's
loyalty. Titus' arrival in Macedonia with news of their restored
obedience had been an inexpressible relief (ii. 5-17; vii. 8-16). It
remains only to set his 'ministry of the new covenant' once more in
contrast with the Mosaic 'ministry of condemnation and death,' including
further elucidation of the doctrine of the resurrection body (iii.
1--vi. 10) and to urge generosity in the matter of the collection (chh.
viii.-ix.).

The somewhat disordered, but unmistakably genuine material of 2nd
Corinthians was probably given out as a kind of residuum of Pauline
material long after our 1st Corinthians had been put in circulation,
perhaps when renewed strife had caused the church in Rome to intervene
through Clement (95), who quotes 1st Corinthians, but shows no knowledge
of 2nd Corinthians. The correspondence is not only invaluable to the
church for its pæan of love as the invincible, abiding gift of the
Spirit (1st Cor. xiii.) and its sublime eulogy of the "ministry of the
new covenant," but instructive in the highest degree to the historian.
Almost every aspect of Paul's work as missionary, defender of his own
independent apostleship and gospel, guide and instructor of developing
Gentile-Christian thought, and ardent commissioner for peace with the
apostolic community in Syria, is here set forth. The best exposition of
the history is the documentary material itself, and conversely.

Romans was written during the peaceful winter at Corinth (55-56) which
followed these weeks of tormenting anxiety in Macedonia (Acts xx. 1-3).
Paul feels that he has carried the gospel to the very shores of the
Adriatic (xv. 19). He is on the point of going to Jerusalem with his
great 'offering of the Gentiles,' and has already fixed his eye on Rome
and "Spain"! Just as before the First Missionary Journey he forestalled
opposition by frankly laying his gospel before the Pillars, so now he
lays it before the church in Rome, but most delicately and tactfully,
not as though assuming to admonish Christians already "filled with all
knowledge and able to admonish one another" (xv. 14), but "that I with
you may be comforted in you, each of us by the other's faith" (i. 12).
Thus the Epistle is an eirenicon. For Rome was even more than Ephesus
had been, a preoccupied territory, though a metropolis of Paul's
mission-field. Most of the church are Paul's sympathizers, but there
are many of the 'weak,' who may easily be 'offended.' The letter repeats
and enlarges the argument of Galatians for the gospel of Grace, carrying
back the promise to Abraham to its antecedent in the fall of Adam,
whereby all mankind had passed under the domination of Sin and Death.
The function of the Law is again made clear as bringing men to
consciousness of this bondage, till it is done away by (mystical) death
and resurrection with Christ. In the adoption wrought by the Spirit the
whole creation even, groaning since Adam's time under 'vanity,' is
liberated in the manifestation of the sons of God. Jesus, glorified at
the right hand of God, is the firstfruits of the cosmic redemption (Rom.
i.-viii.). Such is Paul's theory of 'evolution.' It is followed by a
vindication of God in history. Rom. ix.-xi. exhibits the relation of Jew
and Gentile in the process of the redemption. Israel has for the time
being been hardened that the Gentiles may be brought in. Ultimately
their very jealousy at this result will bring them also to repentant
faith.

Paul's sublime exposition of his view of cosmic and historic redemption
is followed (as in all the Epistles) by a practical exhortation (chh.
xii.-xiv.), the keynote of which is unity through mutual forbearance and
loving service. It repeats the Corinthian figure of the members in the
body, and the Galatian definition of the 'law of Christ.' Special
application is made to the case of the scrupulous who make distinctions
of days and of meats. Here, however (xiv. 1--xv. 13), there is no longer
need to resist a threatened yoke. Only tenderness and consideration are
urged for the over-scrupulous "brother in Christ." It was in this spirit
that Paul and his great company of delegates from the churches of the
Gentiles went up to Jerusalem (Acts xx. 4--xxi. 17).




CHAPTER IV

PAUL AS PRISONER AND CHURCH FATHER


The second period of Paul's literary career begins after an interval of
several years. This interval is covered indeed, so far as the great
events of the Apostle's personal story are concerned, by the last nine
chapters of Acts, but exceedingly obscure as respects the fortunes of
his mission-field and the occasion for the group of Epistles which come
to us after its close. It is barely possible that a fragment or two from
the so-called Pastoral Epistles (1st Timothy, 2nd Timothy, Titus), which
seem to be compiled long after Paul's death on the basis of some
remnants of his correspondence, may have been written shortly after the
arrest in Jerusalem and "first defence." In 2nd Tim. iv. 11-18 a journey
is referred to from Troas by way of Ephesus which coincides in many
respects with that of Acts xx. If the fragment could be taken out from
its present setting it might be possible to identify the two; for it is
clear from the forecast of Acts xx. 25, 38 that Paul never did revisit
this region. The grip of Rome upon her troublesome prisoner was not
relaxed until his martyrdom, probably some considerable time before the
"great multitude" whom Nero condemned after the conflagration of 64.
However, until analysis can dissect out with greater definiteness the
genuine elements of the Pastoral Epistles, they cannot be used to throw
light upon the later period of Paul's career. A historical background
has indeed been created to meet their requirements--a release of Paul,
resumption of missionary activities on the coasts of the Ægean, renewed
imprisonment in Rome and ultimate martyrdom. But this has absolutely no
warrant outside the Pastorals themselves, and is both inconsistent with
Acts and open to criticism intrinsically. The story thus created of a
release, _second_ visitation of the Greek churches, and _second_
imprisonment must, therefore, be regarded as fictitious, and the
Pastoral Epistles in their present form as products of the post-Pauline
age.

It is our task to trace the development among the Greek churches of
Christianity conceived as a "revelation of God in Christ," alongside of
its development in the 'apostolic' church, until the period of
'catholic' unity and the completed canon. Upon this development the
story of Paul's personal fortunes in Acts throws but little light. We
merely see that his great peace-making visit to Jerusalem was suddenly
interrupted by his arrest in the temple, while engaged in an act of
worship undoubtedly intended by him to demonstrate his willingness in
the interest of unity to "become as under the Law to them that are under
the Law." After this his great delegation from the Gentile churches must
have scattered to their homes. Paul remained a prisoner for two years in
Cæsarea, and after an adventurous journey covering the ensuing autumn
and winter (59-60), spent two more years in less rigid confinement at
Rome. We need no hint from his request in 2nd Tim. iv. 13 for "books and
parchments" to infer that the years of forced seclusion in Cæsarea were
marked by study and meditation; but narrative and inference together
convey but little of what we mainly desire to know: the course of
religious development in the Pauline churches, as a background for the
literature.

On the other hand recent research into religious conditions in the early
Empire has removed the principal objections to the authenticity of
Philippians, Philemon, Colossians, and even Ephesians. We are far from
being compelled to come down to the time of the great Gnostic systems of
the second century to find a historical situation appropriate to this
group of letters purporting to be written by Paul from his captivity.
Indeed they exhibit on any theory of their origin a characteristic and
legitimate development of the Pauline gospel of Son ship by the Spirit
of Adoption abolishing the dispensation of Law. It is a development
almost inevitable in a conception of 'the gospel' formed on Greek ideas
of Redemption, if we place in opposition to it a certain baser type of
superstitious, mongrel Judaism, revealed in the Epistles themselves,
repeatedly referred to in Acts, and now known to us by a mass of
extraneous documentary material.

The new disturbers of the churches' peace revealed in the Epistles of
the Captivity are still of Jewish origin and tendency; but at least in
the region of Colossæ (in the Lycus Valley, adjacent to southern
Galatia) the issue is no longer that between Law and Grace, but concerns
the nature and extent of the Redemption. The trouble still comes from a
superstitious exaltation of the Mosaic revelation; but those whom Paul
here opposes do not "use the Law lawfully," frankly insisting on its
permanent obligation as the will of God for all sons, unaffected by the
Cross. It is now admitted to be an "ordinance of angels"; but the
observance of it is inculcated because man's redemption can only come
through conciliation of these higher beings. Mystical union with
superhuman Powers is to be promoted by its observances. This
superstition is neither purely Jewish, nor purely Greek. It is
composite--Hellenistic. Judaism is imitated in the superstitious
reverence for the Law; but the conception of Redemption leaves behind
every thought of national particularism and is openly individualistic.
The redemption sought is that of the individual soul from the
limitations of humanity, and doubtless the name of Jesus played an
important rôle in the emancipation, as in the exorcisms of the sons of
Sceva (Acts xix. 13 f.); only it was not "above every name."

But even Jewish apocalypses such as _Enoch_ and _Baruch_ with all their
superstitious angelology and demonology manage somehow to cling to the
ancient Jewish faith in the primacy of man, and Paul in like manner
upholds against the theosophists the doctrine of the believer's Son ship
and joint-heirship with Christ. In fact the Adoption, Redemption and
Inheritance accorded in the gift of the Spirit are to his mind gifts so
great and exalted as to make it a "gratuitous self-humiliation" to pay
homage, in Mosaic or other ceremonial, to "angels," "principalities," or
"powers." In Christ we already have a foothold in the heavenly regions.
We were foreordained in his person to be "heirs" "before the foundation
of the world." His resurrection and ascension "to the right hand of God"
participated in by us through "the Spirit" was a "triumph" over the
'Elements' and 'Rulers.' They should be beneath the Christian's feet in
feeling, as they soon will be in reality.

This exalted doctrine of Christ's Son ship as compared with the mere
temporary authority of "angels and principalities and powers," secures
to the Epistles of the Captivity their well-deserved title of
"Christological"; for they lay the foundation for all later doctrines of
the Logos or Word. It is well to realize, however, that the doctrine is
in origin and meaning simply a vindication of the divine dignity of
manhood.

An idea of outward conditions at the time of writing may be gained from
the two Epistles of the group most universally admitted to be genuine,
Philemon and Philippians. Both are written from captivity, almost
certainly in Rome, because the writer is expecting, if released, to
revisit the Ægean coasts, which was not Paul's expectation in Cæsarea.
But there is a wide difference between the two as respects the
circumstances presupposed. The tone of Philemon is hopeful, sprightly,
even jocose. Paul is in company with a group of "fellow-workers" which
significantly includes "Mark," as well as two companions of the voyage
to Rome, "Aristarchus" of Thessalonica, and "Luke" (Acts xxvii. 2).
Epaphras, his "fellow-prisoner," appears in Colossians as the founder of
that church and a teacher in the adjacent towns of Hierapolis and
Laodicea. He has brought to Paul either of his own knowledge or by
report from others, disturbing news of the inroads of the heresy.
Onesimus, whose case occasions the letter to Philemon, is an escaped
slave of this friend and convert of Paul. The apostle is sending back
the slave with the request that he be forgiven and manumitted. The
interrelation of the persons mentioned in Philemon and Colossians shows
that the occasion is the same. Tychicus (_cf._ Acts xx. 3) the bearer of
Colossians (Col. iv. 7) accompanies Onesimus. Ephesians (if authentic)
belongs to the same group, being also carried by Tychicus (Eph. vi. 21).
It was certainly _not_ intended for Ephesus, but for some church or
churches not directly known to Paul (i. 15; iii. 2). It bears much the
same relation to Colossians as Romans to Galatians. In spite of copious
evidences of its use reaching back even to Clement of Rome (95) the
genuineness of Ephesians is more seriously questioned than that of any
other Pauline letter save the Pastorals. In the present writer's
judgment this suspicion is unfounded, but the question of Pauline,
semi-Pauline or deutero-Pauline is immaterial to the general
development.

Philippians is of later date than Philemon and its companions. Paul has
been in circumstances of dire physical distress, and is comforting his
correspondents in view of an immediately impending decision of his case
(ii. 23). The issue will be life or death, and Paul has no earthly (but
only super-earthly) reasons for hoping the verdict may not be adverse.
He is still expecting, if released, to revisit the Ægean coast (ii. 24);
but it is only smiling through his tears when he tells the Philippians
that their need of him is so great that he is confident he will be
spared to them (Phil. 1. 12-30). Knowing that this journey was never
made, we can but infer that the fate so near at hand in Phil. ii. 17
came actually to pass. Paul's blood was "poured out a libation," as
tradition of extreme antiquity credibly reports, and it can hardly have
been after a release, return to Greece and second arrest. The passage in
2nd Tim iv. 5-8 which repeats the figure of the libation (Phil. ii. 17),
treating it no longer as doubtful, but a tragic certainty, will have
been penned (if authentic) but a few weeks at most after Philippians,
and immediately before the end. If Philemon-Colossians-Ephesians be
dated in 62, Philippians, with the possible fragments in 2nd Timothy,
may be dated a few months later.

Conditions at Philippi appear only in a favourable light from this
latest authentic epistle. Paul can thank God upon every remembrance of
these loyal and liberal Macedonian friends. In Rome, however, he is
still affected by Judaizing opposition, though his attitude toward it
(in Rome at least) shows the significant difference from Galatians that
he can now be thankful that Christ is preached even thus (Phil. i.
15-18). Moreover there is a difference in the type of legalism
represented; for while in his warning to the Philippians of the possible
coming of the heretics Paul is moved to recall his own renunciation of
legalistic righteousness, the terms of opprobrium applied to the
disturbers imply an immorality and assimilation to heathenism (Phil.
iii. 2 19; _cf._ Rom. xvi. 17-20) which could not justly be said to
characterize the legalism of the synagogue.

The doctrinal elements of Philippians consist of two passages: (1) the
denunciation of the "concision" (a term applied to the heathenized
renegade Jew) ending with a reminder of the high enthronement of our
spiritual Redeemer (iii. 1-21); (2) the definition of the "mind," or
"disposition," of Christ exhibited in his self-abnegating incarnation,
obedient suffering, and supreme exaltation (ii. 5-11). Both passages are
characteristic of Paul's gospel in general, which is always, as against
that of the Judaizers, the gospel of a drama, or spectacle, witnessed;
not a gospel of teachings heard. It is a gospel _about_ Jesus, not of
precepts inculcated _by_ Jesus, a drama of redemption for all mankind
out of servitude into Son ship, wherein the cross is central. Both
passages are also characteristic, as we shall see, of the later period
of Paul's literary activity; for even in Philippians, the dominant
doctrinal motive is the Redemption to which Paul is looking forward, and
this is now conceived even more strongly than in the earlier letters in
terms of personal religion. He anticipates "departing to be with Christ"
(i. 23) rather than awaiting Him on earth (1st Thess. iv. 17). The
"goal" toward which the Christian "presses on" is personal immortality
through mystic union with Christ in the life of God (iii. 10-14). This
too is a real doctrine of the Kingdom of God; but its starting-point is
humanity's triumph over its enemies 'sin' and 'death,' not Israel's
triumph over its oppressors. Still more in the Colossian group does it
become apparent how the 'far-off, divine event' is a unity of mankind
through the Spirit corresponding to the Stoic figure of the members and
the body rather than the 'Kingdom of David.'

Again the opponents in Phil. iii. 2, 18 f. are not mere Pharisaic
legalists, unable to see that Law and Grace are mutually exclusive
systems, and nullifying the significance of the Cross by perpetuating
the system it was intended to abolish. If we may explain the difference
by Colossians, they are Jews of heathenish tendencies, pretended
adherents of the gospel, who nullify its significance by perpetuating
regard for the Law; only the servility deplored is not servility toward
God, but toward "angels" (Col. ii. 18).

To appreciate the enlargement which has come to Christianity beyond its
merely 'apostolic' form through the independent development of the Greek
churches in this second period we must realize that Paul's 'gospel of
the uncircumcision' differed in respect to promise as well as law. The
coming Kingdom which he preached was something more than "the kingdom of
our father David" extended from Jerusalem. What it really was becomes
fully apparent only in the 'Christological Epistles.' But we must study
the opposition to appreciate how differently the idea of Redemption had
developed on Greek soil.

That aspect of Judaism which was most conspicuous to the outsider in
Paul's day was not the legalism of the scribes and the Palestinian
synagogue, perpetually embalmed in the Talmud and orthodox rabbinism of
to-day. It was the superstition and magic which excite the contempt of
satirists like Horace, Juvenal, and Martial, and call forth descriptions
like that of the letter of Hadrian to Servianus, characterizing the
Samaritans, Jews _and Christians_ dwelling in Egypt as "all astrologers,
haruspices, and quacksalvers." It is this type of Jew who is most widely
known in the contemporary Hellenistic world; whose spells and
incantations, framed in Old Testament language, are perpetuated in the
leaden incantation rolls and magic papyri of the Berlin collection;
whose portrait is painted in the Simon Magus of Acts viii. 14-24, the
Elymas the sorcerer of Acts xiii. 6-12, the "strolling Jews, exorcists,"
and the "seven sons of Sceva" of Acts xix. 13-20. A Christian writer
early in the second century is so impressed with this characteristic of
contemporary Judaism that he even distinguishes as the third type of
religion, besides idolatry and Christianity, "the Jews, who fancy that
they alone know God, but do not, worshipping angels and archangels, the
moon and the month," and seeks to prove his case by citing the Old
Testament festal system. Indeed this idea of Judaism is the predominant
one among the second-century apologists. Jewish "superstition" is a
notorious fact of the time. The transcendentalizing of Jewish theology
after the Persian period had led inevitably to an elaborate angelology
and demonology. When as part of this process a more and more
supernatural character was attributed to the Law it could but have a
two-fold effect. The learned and orthodox would treat it soberly as a
revelation of the divine will. This is the legalistic development we see
in the Talmud and the Palestinian synagogue. The ignorant and
superstitious, especially in the Greek-speaking world, would use it as a
book of magic. This is what we see among many Jewish sects, particularly
in Samaria, Egypt and among the Greek-speaking Jews. The tendency was
marked even in Galilee. Jesus Himself stigmatizes the morbid craving of
His countrymen for miracles as the mark of an "adulterous" generation,
because the power invoked was not divine, but always angelic, or even
demonic. Paul alludes to the same trait (1st Cor. i. 22). But while
there is a singular absence both from the Pauline and the Johannine
writings of any reference to exorcism, the typical miracle of Synoptic
story, it has been justly remarked that no element of Paul's thought
has been so little affected by that of Jesus as his angelology and
demonology. Paul's world-view, like that of the apocalypses of his time,
is a perfect phantasmagoria of angels and demons, "gods many and lords
many." His conception of the redemption conflict is not a wrestling
against flesh and blood, but against "world-rulers of this (lower region
of) darkness," against "archangels," "elements," "principalities,"
"powers." The one thing which takes away all harmful influence from this
credulity (if we must apply an unfairly modern judgment to an ancient
writer) is his doctrine of the Son ship and Lordship of Jesus, with whom
the redeemed are "joint-heirs" of the entire creation and thus superior
to angels. In this respect Paul has imbibed the mind of Christ. Jesus'
remedy for superstition is not scientific but religious. It does not
deny the popularly assumed relation to "spirits" good or evil, but
affirms a direct relation to the Infinite Spirit, which reduces all
angels and demons to insignificance save as "ministers." Paul's
world-view starts with the creation of man to be lord and heir of the
world (Gal. iv. 1; 1st Cor. iii. 22; _cf._ Gen. i. 28). The "purpose of
God, which he purposed in Christ Jesus, before the creation, unto a
dispensation of the fulness of the ages" is "to our glory." It would be
frustrated if the "Second Adam" did not become the Heir, in whom the
redeemed creation would find the goal of its long expectancy. Paul has a
cosmology as well as "Enoch." He could not be a worthy follower of
Jesus--he could not even be a loyal "son of the Law" without holding to
the accepted doctrine of the Inheritance intended for Messiah and his
obedient people. It did not make him less firm in this conviction when
as a Christian he thought of Jesus as the Messiah, and of Jew and
Gentile united in his kingdom; only the starting-point is not the
subjection of the sons of Abraham under Gentiles, but the subjection of
the sons of Adam under "world-rulers of this darkness." When he combines
Ps. viii. and Ps. cx. in his depiction of the reign of Christ in 1st
Cor. xv. 24-27, it is a sure indication of its scope as Paul understood
it. He included in the lordship over creation, and the subjection of all
"enemies" which the exalted Christ is awaiting "at the right hand of
God," the subjection of "angels, and principalities, and powers and
every name that is named, whether of beings in heaven, or on earth, or
under the earth." Paul pursues, then, the method of the apocalyptic
writers in making his doctrine of Redemption and the Kingdom
transcendental. By making it cosmic he undermines its Jewish
particularism. He avoids the superstition by holding firmly to Jesus'
doctrine of Son ship by _moral_ affinity with God.

In the Christological Epistles accordingly it is apparent that the
Pauline churches are learning to think of the coming Kingdom in a widely
different way from the 'apostolic.' The Greek doctrine of mystic union,
not the rabbinic of a "share in the world to come," is the basis. In due
time we shall see how difficult the process of reconciliation became
between Greek and Semitic thought in this field also. For the present we
can only note how in the great theme of the Unity of the Spirit in Eph.
iv. 1--vi. 9 it is not the 'apostolic' ideal of a restoration of the
kingdom to Israel according to the oath sworn to Abraham (Luke i. 68-75;
_cf._ Acts i. 6) that dominates, but an enlargement of the figure of the
body and members, a figure commonly employed by Stoic writers, to apply
to the unity of the church in Corinthians and Romans. In the Epistles of
the Captivity the doctrine of the Kingdom is a social organism permeated
and vitalized by Christ's spirit of service. Personal immortality is
union with the life of God.

In view of the notoriety of Ephesus as the very centre of the trade in
magic (so much so that spells and incantations were technically known as
"Ephesian letters") and of what Acts tells us of the enormous
destruction there of "books of magic" effected by Paul's preaching, it
is not surprising that Asia and Phrygia should appear a few years after
Paul's departure as the hot-bed of a "philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the 'elements' of the world, and not after
Christ." Acts xx. 29 makes Paul predict the heresy.

Such was especially the case at Colossæ, a little town long after
notorious for its superstition, where Epaphras, now Paul's
fellow-prisoner, had founded the church. Epaphras himself at the time of
Paul's writing was in great anxiety both for this church and for the
adjoining churches at Hierapolis and Laodicea. Colossians is written to
meet this danger, and was sent by the same bearers as the note to
Philemon. It was to be exchanged, after being read at Colossæ, for
another epistle sent simultaneously to Laodicea. Whether our Ephesians
is this companion letter or only a deutero-Pauline production framed on
the basis of some genuine letter written on this occasion, is a disputed
point among critics. In Marcion's canon our Ephesians was called
"Laodiceans," and in our own oldest textual authorities it has no
address. We may assume that Ephesians is really the companion letter,
whose original address was for some reason cancelled;[15] or that it is
but partially from Paul's own hand. Neither view will materially alter
our conception of his teaching, or the special application of it to the
circumstances of the churches of the Lycus Valley. The important thing
to observe is that whereas the application in Colossians is specific, in
Ephesians it is systematic and general. Colossians wages a direct
polemic against those who are making believers the spoil of mere
'Elements' by introducing distinctions of "meats _and drinks_" (a step
beyond Mosaism), with observance of "feast days, new moons and
sabbaths." In Ephesians we have, either altogether at first hand, or to
a greater or less extent at second, a general, affirmative presentation
of Paul's doctrine of Lordship in Christ. It has only incidental
allusion to being "deceived with empty words" (v. 6), and a warning not
to be "children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men in craftiness, after the wiles of error"
(iv. 14).

    Footnote 15: Harnack very ingeniously suggests as a reason the ill
    repute later incurred by Laodicea (_cf._ Rev. iii. 15 f.);
    comparing the chiselling out from inscriptions of the names of
    unpopular kings.

Colossians and Ephesians develop, accordingly, that (cosmological)
wisdom of God conveyed to Paul by the Spirit of Christ in a "mystery,"
at which he had only hinted in 1st Cor. ii. 1-16. Paul's _gnosis_, or
insight, concerns the purpose of God in creation, hidden even from the
(angelic) "world-rulers," who are coming to nought. The Spirit of
Christ, who as the divine Wisdom had been the agent of creation, is
given to Christian apostles and prophets. It affords them in the
revelation of this "mystery" a philosophy both of creation and
redemption which puts to shame mere speculative reasoning. The
Inheritance--the things God prepared for those that love Him--consists
(as an apocalyptic writer had said) of "things which eye had not seen,
nor ear heard, nor had entered into the heart of man to conceive." Paul
had purposely refrained from unfolding this revealed cosmology and
philosophy of history to the Corinthians, in order to avoid just the
evils which the teaching of Apollos had apparently precipitated at the
time when 1st Corinthians was written. Still, we can gain from this very
epistle (1st Cor. viii. 6; xv. 24-28) a partial conception of his
doctrine of Christ as the beginning and end of the creation, the Wisdom
of God by whom and for whom as Heir, all things were created. From
Romans i.-viii. and ix.-xi. we can easily see that as Second Adam the
Messiah was to Paul the key to the world's development and to human
history; for since the triumph of Satan in Eden the whole creation had
waited, groaning, for the advent of the sons. Galatians makes it no less
clear that he thought of the Cross as the epoch-making event, which
marks the transition from the period of the control of the world by
secondary agencies, to the rule of the Son. This "mystery" is simply
brought out and developed now in the Epistles of the Captivity. The
effort and prayer is that the readers may "have the eyes of their heart
enlightened," obtain something of Paul's own insight into the riches of
the inheritance they are to share with Christ, something of Paul's
experience of the power of God in raising Christ from the dead and
setting Him on the throne of glory. If they but realize what Son ship
and heirship with Christ implies--if they but take in the fact that by
the resurrection Spirit within them they have already in a sense shared
in this deliverance and this exaltation, they will be forearmed against
all the vain deceits of theosophy. It is in fact this resurrection
Spirit which brings about the unity of the world as a single organism.
It extends from the uppermost height to the nethermost abyss. And
because it is the Spirit of Jesus, it fills all it touches with the
disposition to loving service. It affords a new ethics and a new
politics whose keynote is the law of love in imitation of God and
Christ. All social relations are recreated by it, beginning with family
and church. Hence we must think of our redemption as like Israel's from
the bondage and darkness of Egypt. The principalities and powers of this
world, spiritual hosts of wickedness in the super-terrestrial regions,
are vainly endeavouring to hold back the people of God, in "this
darkness." We have only to wait like Israel at the Passover "with our
loins girt, and our feet shod." The Deliverer will soon appear from
heaven, clad in armour of salvation, as in the ancient passover songs,
cleaving the darkness with his sword of light, and leading forth the
captives.

In these themes, variously interwoven in Ephesians and Colossians, it is
difficult to say whether it is the note of unity or the note of freedom
which predominates. Certainly we can recognize the same great apostle of
liberty who in the epistles of the earlier period had proved the power
and value of his religious insight by seizing upon the doctrine of Son
ship as the essential heart of the gospel. It is the same genius
consciously taught of God who had demanded and obtained recognition on
equal terms for his gospel of Grace and Son ship, a gospel given by
revelation of God's Son "in" him, who now demands that the gift of the
Spirit to Jew and Gentile be recognized as calling for reconstruction of
the doctrine of the coming Kingdom. "He that ascended is the same also
that descended to the lowest depths that he might fill all things." And
he poured out the "gifts" in order that they might make one organism of
the new social order, a new creation animated and vitalized by Jesus'
spirit of loving service.

For just as in all the great earlier epistles the note of longing for
peace and unity in love rings ever stronger and clearer above the
strife, so in the later epistles, the note of triumph in liberty has a
deep under-chord of thanksgiving for reconciliation achieved. The great
pæan of reverent adoration for the glory of God's grace in Eph. i. 3-14,
is a thanksgiving for the union of Jew and Gentile in one common
redemption. The retrospect of the work of God in ii. 11-21 is the
proclamation of "peace to him that was far off and peace to him that was
nigh." It is described as the building of Jew and Gentile into one
living temple, upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ
Jesus Himself being the chief corner-stone. The exhortation to the unity
of the Spirit in iv. 1--vi. 9 rests upon an exultant application of the
figure of the "one new man" in whose body all are members, that would be
inconceivable if at the time of writing the church which had received
the gifts from the ascended Lord was not indeed one body, but two bodies
standing apart in mutual distrust and jealousy.

In fact we may say not of Ephesians only, but of Colossians likewise,
and indeed of all the group: Their keynote is not so much the conquest
of all things by Christ as "the reconciliation of all things in Christ,
whether things upon the earth, or things in the heavens" (Col. i. 20).
It is not unreasonable to infer from such undertones as these that the
prayer was answered in which Paul when he set out from Corinth had
besought the Roman church by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of
the Spirit to strive together with him, that his ministration which he
had for Jerusalem might be acceptable to the saints, that so his coming
to them in Rome through the will of God might be in joy, and that
together with them he might find rest.




CHAPTER V

PSEUDO-APOSTOLIC EPISTLES


We cannot wonder that an epoch of the church's history which followed
upon the martyrdom in rapid succession of all its remaining great
leaders, should at first be poor in literary products. James the Lord's
brother was stoned to death by a mob in Jerusalem in the year 61-2. His
namesake, brother of John, had been beheaded early in 44 by Herod
Agrippa I. Among the "others" who, as Josephus informs us, perished
along with James in 61, we may, perhaps, reckon John, who stands beside
him in Paul's list of the Pillars. This John, son of Zebedee, brother of
the other James, is reckoned a martyr in the same sense as his brother
in the earliest gospels. The brothers are assured that they shall drink
the same cup of suffering as the Lord, though they may not claim in
return pre-eminent seats in glory (Mark x. 39 f.). John did not suffer
with his brother James in 44, because he is present at the conference in
46-7 (Gal. ii. 9); but one of the traditions of the Jerusalem elders
reported by Papias declared that he was "killed by the Jews" in
fulfilment of the Lord's prediction, and this early tradition must be
accepted in spite of its conflict with one which gradually superseded it
after John came to be regarded as author of Revelation and the Fourth
Gospel. The statement that he was killed "together with James his
brother" may be due merely to the (not infrequent) confusion of the two
Jameses.

Paul's decapitation in Rome occurred not more than a year or two later,
and was followed there in 64, according to very ancient and trustworthy
tradition, by the martyrdom of Peter. The death of all the principal
leaders explains why the Jerusalem church when it reassembled after the
overthrow of city and temple in the year 70, put forward no more
prominent candidates for the leadership than a certain Symeon, son of
Clopas, one of the group of 'relatives of the Lord' who are traceable
"until the time of Trajan," and a certain unknown Thebuthis. Symeon,
according to Eusebius, who takes his account from Hegesippus (165), was
the representative of "those of the apostles and disciples of the Lord
that were still living, together with the Lord's relatives." Thebuthis
is said to have sprung from one of the heretical Jewish sects and to
have organized a schism in consequence of his disappointment. All we can
be sure of is that Jerusalem 'down to the time of Trajan' continued to
regard itself as the seat of apostolic authority and arbiter of
orthodoxy, on account of its succession of disciples and relatives of
the Lord. Among the latter the leading, if not the only, representatives
of the seed of David, when "search was made" in the persecution under
Domitian (81-95), were two _grandsons_ of Jude, the Lord's brother. Jude
himself, then, was no longer living. Luke (_c._ 100), Papias (145), and
Hegesippus (165) successively exhibit the growing authority of the
"tradition handed down," especially that of "the apostles and elders in
Jerusalem." But what Papias records of the traditions of these "elders"
does not rise above the level of Jewish midrash, and the epistles which
bear the names of James and Jude have little intrinsic value, and
enjoyed from the beginning only the most meagre acceptance. At Rome
tradition attaches to the name of Peter, but besides the bare fact of
his martyrdom "at the same time with Paul" (64-5) it has little of value
to relate. We cannot safely go beyond the tradition reported by Porphyry
that Peter fed the lambs (at Rome) for a few months before his
martyrdom, and that reported by Papias that Mark, who had been Peter's
assistant, compiled there the Gospel which bears his name, basing it
upon his recollections of Peter's preaching. Of this vitally important
work (_c._ A.D. 75) we must speak in another connection. We are
concerned at present with writings which directly reflect the
development of Christian life and doctrine in this sub-apostolic
period, especially that in the Pauline mission-field.

Except for the appearance of the Gospel of Mark at Rome (_c._ 75) there
remains nothing to break the silence and darkness of twenty years after
the deaths of James and Peter and Paul. The writings which finally did
appear were almost inevitably anonymous or pseudepigraphic, because
apostolic authority stood so high that no other could secure
circulation. Hebrews (_c._ 85) has an epistolary attachment at the close
of its "exhortation," but either never had an address or superscription,
or else has been deprived of it. All the Synoptic writings are
anonymous, though Luke-Acts (_c._ 100) is dedicated to a literary
patron. Revelation (_c._ 95) is boldly asserted to be the work of the
Apostle John in the prefatory chapters and the epilogue (i. 2, 4, 9;
xxii. 8). But the body of the work, though of Palestinian origin, has a
totally different standpoint, and claims the authority of a prophet, not
that of an apostle. Similarly the Fourth gospel when finally published
received an appendix (ch. xxi.) which cautiously suggests the Apostle
John as its author; but the three Epistles by the same writer are
anonymous. The homily called James (90-100) has a superscription which
superficially connects it with the chief authority in Jerusalem, and the
Epistle of Jude prefixes to itself the name which stood next in the same
class. But even in antiquity they had a precarious standing, and
neither is a real letter. Finally there are the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, purporting to be written by Paul, and a whole series of every
kind, epistles, gospel, acts, and apocalypse, written in the name of
Peter, of which only two secured final adoption into the canon. Of all
these only 1st Peter and the so-called Pastoral Epistles (1st and 2nd
Timothy and Titus) have some claim to be considered genuine; for 1st
Peter is certainly of early origin (_c._ 85), and was undisputed in
antiquity; while the Pastorals, though rejected by Marcion, and as a
whole of late date (90-110), are made up on the basis of some authentic
Pauline material.

The post-apostolic epistles may be grouped into two classes, according
as they are predominantly occasioned (_a_) by internal dangers of heresy
and moral laxity; or (_b_) by the external peril of persecution. To the
former (_a_) must be reckoned (1) the so-called Pastoral Epistles; (2)
Jude; (3) 2nd Peter. All these concern themselves outspokenly with a
type of false doctrine which has certain more or less definite traits,
and is tending toward the Gnostic heresies of the second century, if not
yet clearly identifiable with them. But the inspired genius of Paul is
wanting. The age is not creative, but conservative. Its writers are
ecclesiastics and church teachers, not apostles and prophets. Their
distinctive note is appeal to apostolic authority. Whether the name by
which they cover their own insignificance be that of "Paul," or "Jude
the brother (son?) of James," or "Peter," they have little or no
independent message. They hark back to the "pattern of sound words" the
"deposit," "the faith once for all delivered to the saints," "the words
spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandments of the Lord and
Saviour through your apostles," in particular the "wisdom of our beloved
brother Paul" who (in the Pastoral Epistles) had predicted the heresy,
and "in all his epistles" had spoken of the resurrection and judgment.
Second Peter, which refers in the passage just quoted (2nd Pet. iii. 2,
15 f.) to the Pauline Epistles alongside "the other Scriptures"
belongs to a very late period (_c._ 150). In fact this Epistle, now
almost universally recognized to be pseudonymous, merely reëdits the
Epistle of Jude, supplying a prefix (ch. i.) and an appendix (ch. iii.)
to make special application of its denunciations to the case of the
false teachers who were "denying the (bodily) resurrection and the
judgment." Neither plagiarism nor pseudonymity were recognized offences
at the time; so that we bring no indictment against the author of 2nd
Peter, were he the Apostle or not. Still our conception of the Galilean
fisherman will be higher without this example of pulpit rhetoric than
with it.

Of the nature of the heresies controverted in this series of writings we
must speak later. As to the region whence they originate something can
be made out already. Not indeed from 2nd Peter, which is of too late
date to be of service. True the readers addressed are assumed to be the
same as in the first epistle, in other words the Pauline mission-field
of Asia Minor (1st Pet. i. 1), and there is reason to think "Asia" was
the region first affected. "Ephesus" and "Asia" are in fact the regions
affected in 1st and 2nd Timothy (1st Tim. i. 3 f.; 2nd Tim. i. 15).
Moreover it is in this same region that we find Polycarp (110-117)
adverting to those who "pervert the sayings of the Lord to their own
lusts, and deny the resurrection and judgment." To the same region and
the same period belong the letters of "the Spirit" in Rev. i.-iii. (_c._
95) with their denunciation of the Balaamite and Nicolaitan heretics,
and still further 1st-3rd John and the Epistles of Ignatius, which are
also polemics against a Gnostic heresy (Doketism) tending to moral
laxity. It is doubtful, however, in view of the general address (2nd
Pet. i. 1), whether the author of 2nd Peter really has a definite circle
in mind, and does not rather in iii. 1 mistakenly treat 1st Peter as a
general epistle. Denial of the resurrection and judgment was not limited
to one locality or period. Hegesippus regards it as a pre-Christian
heresy combated already by James. Equally precarious would be the
assumption that Jude, with its similar general address, was necessarily
intended for Asia Minor. The false teachers resemble those we know of
there, and the denunciation is incorporated by 2nd Peter, but 'Cainites'
and 'Balaamites' were not confined to the regions of 1st John and
Revelation, and Jude might have almost any date between 90 and 120. The
most that can be said is that before the death of Paul the last view we
obtain of his mission-field shows it exposed, especially in the region
of Ephesus, to a rising flood of superstition and false doctrine, while
documents that can be dated with some definiteness in 95-117, such as
Revelation, the Johannine and Ignatian Epistles, and the letter of
Polycarp, show a great advance of heretical teaching in the same region.
The later heresy corresponds in several respects to that combated in
the Pastorals, Jude and 2nd Peter, but becomes at last more distinctly
definable as Doketism, whose most obnoxious form comes to be denial of
the (bodily) resurrection and judgment. The three Pastoral Epistles,
Jude and 2nd Peter may, therefore, be taken as probably reflecting the
growing internal danger confronted by the churches of Asia (if not by
all the churches) in the sub-apostolic age.

Unfortunately, literary relations sometimes interfere with historical
classification, and we are, therefore, compelled to defer treatment of
1st-3rd John and the Epistles of "the Spirit" to the churches (Rev. i.
3), which really belong to our present group (_a_) of writings against
the heresies of (proconsular) Asia. Their relation to the special canon
of Ephesus, whose writings are all ascribed to John, makes it convenient
to consider them in another connection. The reader should bear in mind,
however, that the group extends continuously down to the Epistles of
Ignatius and centres upon Ephesus, where, according to Acts xx. 29 f.,
the "grievous wolves" were to enter in after Paul's departing.

Similar considerations affect the grouping of the Epistle of James,
which almost demands a class by itself. It might be called
anti-heretical, except that its nature is the reverse of controversial,
and its author seems to have no direct contact with the false teachers.
In a remote and general way he deplores the vain talk and disputation
which go hand in hand with a relaxation of the practical Christian
virtues. On the whole it seems more correct to class James with 1st
Peter and Hebrews, particularly as it displays direct literary
dependence on the former, if not on both.

Our second group (_b_) consists of writings not primarily concerned with
heresy. Its first and best example speaks in the name of Peter as
representative of "apostolic" Christianity at Rome. But the doctrine,
and even the phraseology and illustrations of 1st Peter are largely
borrowed from the greater Epistles of Paul, particularly Romans and
Ephesians. Nothing even remotely suggests an author who had enjoyed
personal relations with Jesus, or could relate his wonderful words and
deeds. On the contrary the doctrine is Paul's gospel minus the sting of
the abolition of the Law. In view of the known internal conditions of
the churches to which 1st Peter is addressed in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, _Asia_ and Bithynia it is remarkable how completely the
subject of heresy or false doctrine is ignored. Their adversary the
devil is not at present taking the form of a seducing serpent (2nd Cor.
xi. 3), but of a "roaring lion" openly destroying and devouring (1st
Pet. v. 8 f.), and the same sufferings the Asiatics are called upon to
endure are being inflicted upon their brethren throughout the world. A
systematic, universal "fiery persecution" is going on, which has come
almost as a surprise (iv. 12) and may compel any believer, after having
made "defence" before the magistrate of "the hope that is in him," to
"suffer as a Christian" and to "glorify God in this name." The author
exhorts to irreproachable conduct as citizens, and kindness and good
order in the brotherhood. If such blamelessness of living be combined
with patient endurance of the unjust punishment, Christians who still
must sanctify in their hearts Christ (and not the Emperor) as Lord, will
ultimately be left unharmed.

Superior as is this noble exhortation to patient endurance of suffering
in the meekness of Christ to the controversial rhetoric of 2nd Peter,
immeasurably better as is its attestation in ancient and modern times,
even the most conservative modern critics are compelled to regard it as
at least semi-pseudonymous. It might be just possible to carry back the
conditions of persecution presupposed to the time of Nero. But if it be
Peter writing from Rome after the recent martyrdoms of James and Paul,
why is there no allusion to either? Again, we might possibly prolong the
life of Peter (against all probability) down to the beginning of the
reign of Domitian (81-95). In that case the absence of any allusion to
the great events of recent occurrence in Palestine would be almost
equally hard to explain. Moreover, with any dating the real author
remains a literary man, a Paulinist, a Grecian Jew, and the share
attributable to Peter personally becomes most shadowy. The simpler, and
(as the present writer has come to believe) the more probable view is
that 1st Peter, like the later writings which assumed the name, is
wholly pseudonymous. If, however, it appeared (as we are persuaded) some
twenty years after the Apostle's death, among those perfectly aware of
the fact, assuming no other disguise, but frankly dealing with the
existing situation, this is a kind of pseudonymity which should be
classed with literary fictions and conventions which are harmless
because (at the time) perfectly transparent. Letters written under
fictitious names were in fact a very common literary device of the age.

At all events the Apostle appears as an old man (v. 1) writing from
"Babylon"--rightly taken by the fathers to be a cryptogram for Rome.
Salutations are conveyed from Mark, his "son" (_cf._ Philem. i. 10). The
bearer (writer?) is represented to be Silvanus (like Mark a companion of
Paul with relations to Jerusalem as well), and Silvanus is commended as
a "trustworthy" disciple. The author states it as his object to "exhort
and testify that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand."

Ignorant as we are of its author's name it is fortunate for our study of
the times that the date of 1st Peter is fairly determinable by the
convergence of external and internal evidence. Echoes from it appear
already in Clement of Rome (95) as well as in James and Hermas. We must
think of it, then, as a hand of cordial encouragement extended by a
representative of the Petro-Pauline church at Rome, soon after the
outbreak of the persecution of Domitian (_c._ 90), to the still
independent but suffering churches of Asia Minor. If we remember that it
undertakes to endorse the doctrine of one third of contemporary
Christendom, and (in substance) offers a 'letter of commendation' to
Silvanus, it will be obvious that no name of less authority than that of
Peter could have served. As Zahn has well remarked: "The significant
thing ... is that it is Peter, the most distinguished apostle of the
circumcision (Gal. ii. 7) who bears witness to the genuineness of their
state of grace."

We must place alongside of 1st Peter one other epistle in which the
motive of exhortation to endurance of persecution without relaxation of
the moral standard is prominent, though not exclusive, and a second,
wherein it appears only in a faint echo of "trials," which turn out,
however, as the reader proceeds, to be only "temptations," while the
real occasion of writing is plain--moral relaxation without either
heresy or persecution to excuse it. The two writings in question are the
anonymous "exhortation" handed down under the title "To the Hebrews,"
and the so-called Epistle (in reality a homily) of James. Hebrews begins
as an exposition of the two psalms Paul had quoted in his reference in
1st Cor. xv. 24-28 to the exaltation of Jesus (Pss. viii. and cx.)
proving Him to be the Son, who, after temporary subordination to the
angels, has been exalted above them to the place of supreme dominion.
Christ has thus effected a greater redemption than Moses and Joshua. He
is also a "high-priest after the order of Melchizedek" according to Ps.
cx.; so that the Aaronic priesthood and ceremonial are surpassed as well
as the Mosaic legislation, by the sacrifice of Calvary and intercession
of the risen Redeemer. It is no wonder that in the period of debate
against Judaism the canon-makers gave to this anonymous sermon a title
which ranks it first in the class of subsequent controversial pamphlets
"against the Jews." Controversy, however, is subordinate in the writer's
purpose to edification. He is not unconscious of the dangers of that
superstitious 'worship of the angels,' against which Paul's Asian
epistles had been directed, but his demonstration of the superiority of
the institutions and aims of Christianity to those of Judaism has the
practical object of reinforcing the courage and "faith" of his readers
under pressure of persecution. His argument culminates in an inspiring
list of Scriptural heroes and martyrs, leading up as a climax to "Jesus
the author and perfecter of our faith." As Jesus endured, looking beyond
the shame and suffering of the cross to the joy of His reward, so should
the readers "endure their chastening." Apostacy will meet a fearful doom
in the judgment of fire. To this homily (Heb. i.-xii.) is appended a
concluding chapter (probably by the author himself) which transforms it
into a letter. The author is a church-teacher of the second generation,
as he frankly confesses himself (ii. 3); a disciple of Paul, to judge by
his use of Paul's doctrine and some of his epistles, especially Romans.
To judge by his rhetorical style and his Alexandrian ideas and mode of
thought, he is the sort of teacher Apollos will have been. Just at
present he is separated from his flock (xiii. 19). Where they are we
can only infer from xiii. 24, which conveys salutations from those in
the writer's neighbourhood who are "from Italy." He himself is probably
among the Pauline churches, for he sends news of Timothy (xiii. 23) and
hopes to come soon in company with him. Ephesus, where Apollos was at
last accounts, may possibly be the place of writing. Hebrews would seem
then to be written to Rome, long after the first "great fight of
afflictions" (the Neronian outbreak of 64) and when the danger of
"fainting under the chastening" of a second persecution (that of
Domitian _c._ 90) was imminent. Such slight indications as we have of a
literary relation between Hebrews and 1st Peter suggest the priority of
Hebrews, but the date and occasion must be nearly the same.

"James" is also a homily exhorting to patient endurance, but there is
nothing to suggest its having ever been sent anywhere as a letter, save
the brief superscription written in imitation of 1st Pet. i. 1. "James
... to the twelve tribes of the Dispersion." Imagine the mode of
delivery! Nor is it called forth by any special emergency. There is an
allusion to false doctrine. It is the heresy (!) of "justification by
faith apart from works." But the writer is no more conscious of
contradicting Paul than is Luke in describing Paul's apostleship and
gospel. He merely impersonates the 'bishop of bishops' addressing
Christendom at large, deprecating the loquacity of the "many teachers,"
and commending the 'wisdom' of a "good life" instead. There is protest
against oppression. But it is only the oppression of the poor by the
rich in the Christian brotherhood. He returns to this subject con amore.
Evidently the church of his age is characterized by worldliness both of
thought and conduct, among clergy and laity. But all colour of region or
period is wanting. Take 1st Peter, substitute the head of the Jerusalem
succession for the head of the Roman, remove the Pauline doctrine, the
traces of Jesus and his gospel of Son ship, remove the special
references to local conditions and particular emergencies, leaving only
moral generalities, and the result will be not unlike the Epistle of
James. The author has heard something of Paulinism, has read Hebrews
(Jas. ii. 21-25; v. 10), and imitated 1st Peter (Jas. i. 1, 18, 21; iv.
6 f.; v. 20). Strong arguments have even been advanced to prove that
he was not a Christian at all. He probably was, if only from his
literary connection with the above-named earlier writings, and the
influence exerted by his own on Hermas (Rome, 120-140), and perhaps
Clement (Rome, 95). But as for connection with the historic
Jesus--"Elijah" is his example of the man of prayer (v. 13-18), and
"Job" and "the prophets" his "example of suffering and patience" (v. 10
f.). Hebrews can show more of the influence of Jesus than this (Heb.
v. 7 f., xii. 2-4). Like Hermas (who, however, does not even mention
the name of Jesus) 'James' thinks of Him simply as "the Lord of glory,"
without raising the question how He came to be such.

Apart from the superscription, whose object is only to clothe the homily
with the authority of a name revered throughout the 'catholic' church,
there is nothing to connect James with Syria rather than any other
region outside Paul's mission-field. Even Palestine might be its place
of origin if the date were late enough to account for the Greek style.
At all events it comes first to our knowledge at Rome. There is some
reason to think that Clement of Rome (A.D. 95), whose moralizing is of a
similar type, has been directly influenced by James. If so we have in
James, Clement and Hermas a series illustrative of the decline at Rome
of the Pauline gospel of conscious revelation and inspiration toward the
hum-drum levels of mere 'catholic' catechetics.

With every allowance for differences among critics as to date and origin
of the non-controversial epistles of the sub-apostolic age, it is easy
to see that the resistless march of events is taking up and
accomplishing Paul's effort and prayer for the unity of the two branches
of the Church. One great event of this period, which for us stands out
with startling vividness upon the pages of history, is curiously without
trace or reflection in this literature. We search the New Testament in
vain for the slightest allusion (outside the writings directly or
indirectly derived from Palestine itself) to the fall of Jerusalem in
A.D. 70, and the consequent cessation of Jewish national life and temple
ceremonial. The remoteness of the writers with whom we are dealing both
in time and national interest from the affairs of Jerusalem is not the
only cause. The fate of the temple had no effect to weaken the types of
Judaism with which the church of the sub-apostolic age had to contend.
The Pharisaic legalism of the synagogue became only the stronger when
the hollow Sadducean priesthood collapsed, and temple ceremonial became
simply a ceremonial on paper, the affair no longer of priest and Levite,
but of scribe and Pharisee. So also with the denationalized Judaism of
the Dispersion, a more insidious danger for early converts from
heathenism than the stricter, legalistic type. The crushing of the
nationalistic rebellion, the temporary suppression of the war-party, the
Zealots, only strengthened and promoted Pharisaism, and the Dispersion
was scarcely affected by the losses of the war. When Jerusalem and the
temple fell, temple and city had become entirely superfluous factors to
both parties in the great strife of church versus synagogue. Hebrews
knows of a type of Judaism which is formidable by reason of the appeal
of its ordinances of angels and its sacerdotal system written in a book
of acknowledged divine authority. But the characteristic point is that
in Hebrews, as truly as in Barnabas and Justin Martyr, it is only the
prescription and not the practice which is in question. But for the fact
that the "new testament" of Heb. ix. 15 is still unwritten, its
controversy might properly be described as a battle of books.

On the other hand the pressure of persecution without, combined with the
disappearance of creative leadership within, is visibly forcing the
independent provinces of Christendom toward organic unity under the
principle of apostolic authority. First Peter is the first and greatest
evidence of this tendency to union promoted by external pressure.
Hebrews and James follow as illustrative of the need felt for
maintaining the standards both of doctrine and of morals at their full
height. Christianity must not be thought of as on a level with Judaism,
it is the final and universal revelation. It must not be practised
half-heartedly, with "double-mindedness," nor in vain philosophizing and
professions belied by deeds. It must be obeyed as a new and royal law,
the mirror of divine perfection.

If, then, we turn from these evidences of general conditions in church
and empire to the inward dangers revealed by the writings against
heresy, we shall see how this disruptive influence, already distinctly
apprehended in Paul's later writings, makes itself more and more
strongly felt, and in more and more definite form, with Ephesus and the
churches of Asia as its chief breeding-place.

The Pastoral Epistles in their present form cannot be dated much before
the time when they begin to be used by Ignatius and Polycarp (110-117).
Indeed some phrases (perhaps editorial additions) seem to imply a still
later date, as when in 1st Tim. vi. 20, Timothy is warned against the
"antitheses of miscalled Gnosis," as if with direct reference to
Marcion's system of this title. Their avowed purpose is to counteract
the inroads of heresy, and the remedy applied is ecclesiastical
authority and discipline. Far more of Paul's inspired gospel of Son ship
and liberty, far more of his conception of the redemption in Christ as a
triumph over the spiritual world-rulers of this darkness, is found in
1st Peter and Hebrews than here. Nothing appears of Paul's broad
horizon, his spirit of missionary conquest, his devotion to the unity of
Jew and Gentile in their common access to the Father in one Spirit.
There is no trace of the great Pauline doctrines of the conflict of
flesh and spirit, the superseding of the dispensation of Law by the
dispensation of Grace, the Adoption, the Redemption, the Inheritance.
The attention is turned wholly to local conditions, maintenance of the
transmitted doctrine and order, resistance to the advance of "vain
talk," "Jewish fables," "foolish questionings, genealogies and strifes
about the Law," which go hand in hand with moral laxity. In short the
outlook and temper are those of the Epistle of James, while the remedy
is that of Acts and the Epistles of Ignatius. The Paul who here speaks
is not the missionary and mystic, but the shrewd ecclesiastic. There is
only too much evidence to show that in the Pauline mission-field the
remedy resorted to against the licence in thought and action which
threatened decadence and dissolution after apostolic inspiration had
died out, was the religion of authority, doctrinal and disciplinary, not
the religion of the Spirit. Ecclesiastical appointees take the place as
teachers and defenders of the faith of those who had been the inspired
apostles and prophets of its extension.

And on the other side are the false teachers. They are of Jewish
character in their doctrine, aspiring to be "teachers of the Law" though
really ignorant of its meaning. The worst of them are actual Jews (Tit.
i. 10), which implies that some were not. Moreover the type of doctrine
is still less like the Pharisaism of the synagogue than the "philosophy
and vain deceit" rebuked by Paul at Colossæ. There is similar
distinction of meats (treated in 2nd Tim. iv. 1-5 as a doctrine of
"seducing spirits and demons"), and a prohibition of wine and marriage.
There is side by side with this ascetic tendency one equally marked
toward libertinism and love of money (2nd Tim. iii. 1-9). Both phases
remind us of the "concision" of Paul's later letters. But besides the
larger development new features appear of Hellenistic rather than Jewish
type. The new doctrine of the resurrection as something "past already"
is more closely connected with the Pauline mysticism, the present union
of the believer with the life of Christ "hid in God," than with the
Jewish idea of return to earth in resuscitated flesh. The Paulinist of
the Pastorals is already foreshadowing the great conflict of Ignatius,
Justin and Irenæus against those who "denied the resurrection,"
perverting (as the fathers allege) the meaning of Paul's saying, "flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God" (_cf._ 2nd Pet. iii. 16).
And the Pastorals tend toward the un-Pauline doctrine soon to be
formulated in the 'catholic' church: "I believe in the resurrection of
the _flesh_." Again the false doctrine now distinctly avows itself a
form of Gnosis. "They profess that they know God, but by their works
they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate." And our Paulinist's remedy is the traditional doctrine,
the "pattern of sound words," the "deposit" of the Church teacher, more
especially the whole-some words, "even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness." Thus even the
rich, if they do good, and become "rich in good works" will "lay up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come."

We have only to place these pseudo-Pauline writings side by side with
the Epistles of John and Ignatius to recognize the advance of the heresy
which soon declared itself as Gnostic Doketism, with the Jew Cerinthus
at Ephesus as its principal exponent. Moreover this steadily increasing
inward danger of the Pauline mission-field, a danger not merely sporadic
like the outbursts of persecution, but constant and increasing, is
forcing the two great branches of the Christian brotherhood together on
the basis of 'catholicity' and the 'apostolic' tradition. Between the
churches of the Ægean and that of Rome, where both parties stand on
neutral ground, there are exchanged generous and sympathetic assurances
of essential unity of doctrine in the great outbreak of persecution in
85-90. Among the Pauline churches themselves there is an irresistible
reaction against the vagaries and moral laxity of heretical teaching
toward 'apostolic' tradition and ecclesiastical authority. It appears
with almost startling vividness in the Pastoral Epistles, and meets its
answer from without, perhaps from Rome, perhaps from Syria, in the
homily dressed as an encyclical called the Epistle of James. It is not
hard to foresee what sort of Christian unity is destined to come about.
Nevertheless the creative spirit and genius of Paul was to find
expression in one more splendid product of Ephesus before the Roman
unity was to be achieved.--But before we take up the writings of the
great 'theologian' of Ephesus we must trace the growth in Syria and at
Rome of the Literature of the Church Teacher and Prophet.




PART III

THE LITERATURE OF CATECHIST AND PROPHET


CHAPTER VI

THE MATTHÆAN TRADITION OF THE PRECEPTS OF JESUS


As we have seen in our study of the later literature addressed to, or
emanating from, the Pauline mission-field, the church teacher and
ecclesiastic who there took up the pen after the death of Paul had
scarcely any alternative but to follow the literary model of the great
founder of Gentile Christianity. Inevitably the typical literary product
of this region became the apostolic letter, framed on the model of
Paul's, borrowing his phraseology and ideas, when not actually embodying
fragments from his pen and covering itself with his name. Homilies are
made over into "epistles." Even 'prophecy,' to obtain literary
circulation, must have prefixed epistles of "the Spirit" to the
churches; and when at last a gospel is produced, this too is
accompanied, as we shall see, by three successive layers of enclosing
'epistles.'

At the seat of 'apostolic' Christianity it was equally inevitable that
the literary products should follow a different model. Here, from the
beginning, the standard of authority had been the commandment of Jesus.
Apostleship had meant ability to transmit his teaching, not endowment
with insight into the mystery of the divine purpose revealed in his
cross and resurrection. "The gospel" was the gospel _of_ Jesus. The
letters of Paul, if they circulated at all in Syria and Cilicia at this
early time, have had comparatively small effect on writers like Luke and
James. At Rome the case was somewhat different. Here Pauline influence
had been effectually superimposed upon an originally Jewish-Christian
stock. The Roman Gospel of Mark, accordingly, has just the
characteristics we should expect from this Petro-Pauline community.
Antioch, too, though at the disruption over the question of
table-fellowship it took the side of James, Peter, and Barnabas against
Paul, had always had a strong Gentile element. But Jerusalem, the church
of the apostles and elders, with its caliphate in the family of Jesus,
and its zeal for Jewish institutions and the Law, was the pre-eminent
seat of traditional authority. No other gospel, oral or written, could
for a moment compare in its eyes with its own cherished treasury of the
precepts of Jesus. Its own estimate of itself as conservator of
orthodoxy, and custodian of the sacred deposit, vividly reflected from
the pages of Hegesippus, was increasingly accepted by the other
churches. 'James' and 'Jude' were probably not the real names of the
writers of these 'general' or 'catholic' epistles; but they show in what
direction men looked when there was need to counteract a widespread
tendency to moral relaxation and vain disputations, or to demoralizing
heresy.

We have also seen how inevitable was the reaction after Paul's death,
even among his own churches, toward a historic standard of authority.
Even more marked than the disposition to draw together in fraternal
sympathy under persecution, is the reliance shown by the Pastoral
Epistles on "health-giving words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ" (1st Tim. vi. 3), and on a consolidated apostolic succession as
a bulwark against the disintegrating advance of heresy. In (proconsular)
Asia early in the second century there is an unmistakable and sweeping
disposition to "turn to the word handed down to us from the beginning"
(_Ep. of Polyc._, vii.) against those who were "perverting the sayings
of the Lord to their own lusts." The ancient "word of prophecy" and the
former revelations granted to apostolic seers were also turned to
account by men like Papias and the author of 2nd Peter against those who
"denied the resurrection and judgment."

This Papias of Hierapolis, the friend and colleague of Polycarp, had
undertaken in opposition to "the false teachers, and those who have so
very much to say," to write (probably after the utter destruction of the
community of 'apostles, elders, and witnesses' at Jerusalem in 135), _an
Exposition of the Sayings of the Lord_. He based the work on authentic
tradition of the Jerusalem witnesses, two of whom (Aristion, and John
'the Elder') were still living at the time of his inquiries. In fact,
this much debated "John the Elder," clearly distinguished by Papias from
John the "disciple of the Lord," may be identified, in our judgment,
with the John mentioned by Eusebius and Epiphanius midway in the
succession of 'Elders' of the Jerusalem church between A.D. 62 and 135.
Epiphanius dates his death in 117. Papias gives us practically all the
information we have regarding the beginnings of gospel literature. He
may have known all four of our Gospels. He certainly knew Revelation and
"vouched for its trustworthiness," doubtless against the deniers of the
resurrection and judgment. He "used testimonies" from 1st John, and
probably the saying of Jesus of John xiv. 2; but he seems to have based
his _Exposition_ on two gospels only, giving what he had been able to
learn of their history from travellers who reported to him testimonies
of 'the elders.' Papias' two gospels were our Matthew and our Mark,
whose differences he reconciled by what the Jerusalem elders had
reported as to their origin. Matthew, according to these authorities
(?), represented in its Greek form a collection of the Precepts of the
Lord which had formerly been current in the original Aramaic, so that
its circulation had of course been limited to Palestine. The original
compiler had been the Apostle Matthew. Various Greek equivalents of this
compilation had taken its place where Aramaic was not current. Thus
Papias, in explicit dependence on "the Elder" so far as Mark is
concerned, but without special designation of his authority for the
statement regarding Matthew. It is even possible that his representation
that the primitive Matthew was "in the Hebrew tongue" may be due to
rumours whose real starting-point was nothing more than the _Gospel of
the Nazarenes_, a product of _c._ 110-140 which misled many later
fathers, particularly Jerome. We cannot afford, however, to slight the
general bearing of testimony borne by one such as Papias regarding the
origins of gospel composition, and particularly the two branches into
which the tradition was divided. For Papias had made diligent inquiry.
Moreover his witness does not stand alone, but has the support of still
more ancient reference (_e. g._ 1st Tim. vi. 3, Acts i. 1) and the
internal evidence of the Synoptic Gospels themselves. The motive for his
statement is apologetic. Differences between the two Gospels had been
pointed out on the score both of words and events. Papias shows that
Gospel tradition is not to be held responsible for verbal agreement
between the two parallel reports of the Lord's words. The differences
are attributable to translation. So, too, regarding events. Exact
correspondence of Mark with Matthew (or other gospels) is not to be
looked for, especially as regards the order; because Mark had not
himself been a disciple, and could not get the true order from Peter,
whose anecdotes he reproduced; for when Mark wrote Peter was no longer
living. Mark has reproduced faithfully and accurately his recollection
of "things either said or done," as related by Peter. But Peter had had
no such intention as Matthew of making a systematic compilation
(_syntagma_) of the sayings of the Lord, and had only related his
anecdotes "as occasion required." If the tradition regarding Matthew, as
well as that regarding Mark, was derived from the Elder, he, too, as
well as Papias, knew the Greek Matthew; regarding it as a "translation"
of the apostolic _Logia_, he naturally makes Matthew the standard and
accounts as above for the wide divergence of Mark as to order.

The Jerusalem elder who thus differentiates the two great branches of
gospel tradition into Matthæan Precepts and Petrine Sayings and Doings,
is probably "the Elder John"; for this elder's "traditions" were so
copiously cited by Papias as to lead Irenæus, and after him Eusebius, to
the unwarranted inference of personal contact. Irenæus even identified
the Elder John with the Apostle, thus transporting not only him, but the
entire body of "Elders and disciples" from Jerusalem to Asia, a pregnant
misapprehension to which we must return later. In the meantime we must
note that this fundamental distinction between _syntagmas_ of the
Precepts, and narratives of the Sayings and Doings, carries us back as
far as it is possible to penetrate into the history of gospel
composition. The primitive work of the Apostle Matthew, was probably
done in and for Jerusalem and vicinity--certainly so if written in
Aramaic. The date, if early tradition may be believed, was "when Peter
and Paul were preaching and founding the church at Rome." Oral tradition
must have begun the process even earlier.[16] Mark's work was done at
Rome, according to internal evidence no less than by the unanimous voice
of early tradition. It dates from "after the death of Peter" (64-5)
according to ancient tradition. According to the internal evidence it
was written certainly not long before, and probably some few years
after, the overthrow of Jerusalem and the temple (70). At the time of
Papias' writing, then (_c._ 145), all four gospels were probably known,
though only Matthew and Mark were taken as authoritative because
(indirectly) apostolic. At the time of prosecution of his inquiries the
voice of (Palestinian) tradition was still "living and abiding." If, as
tenses and phraseology seem to imply, this means Aristion and the Elder
John (_ob._ 117?) it is reasonable to regard it as extending back over a
full generation. The original Matthew was even then (_c._ 100), and in
Palestine itself, a superseded book. It had three successors, if not
more, two Greek and one Aramaic, all still retaining their claim to the
name and authority of Matthew[17]; but all had been re-cast in a
narrative frame, which at least in the case of our canonical first
Gospel was borrowed from the Roman work of Mark. So far as the remaining
fragments of its rivals enable us to judge, the same is true in their
case also, though to a less extent. It is quite unmistakably true of
Luke, the gospel of Antioch, that its narrative represents the same
"memorabilia of Peter"; for so Mark's gospel came to be called. Thus the
Petrine story appears almost from the start to have gained undisputed
supremacy. But side by side with this remarkable fact as to gospel
_narrative_ is the equally notable confirmation of the other statements
of 'the Elders' regarding the Precepts. For all modern criticism
admits, that besides the material of Mark, which both Matthew and Luke
freely incorporate, omitting very little, our first and third
evangelists have embodied, in (usually) the same Greek translation but
in greatly varied order, large sections from one or more early
compilations of the Sayings of Jesus.

    Footnote 16: Some authorities of the first rank think there is
    evidence of literary dependence in 1st Cor. i. 18-21 on the Saying
    (Matt. xi. 25-27 = Lk. x. 21 f.).

    Footnote 17: The orthodox Aramaic _Gospel of the Nazarenes_ borrows
    from Luke as well as Matthew, but speaks in the name of "Matthew."
    This apostle was also regarded as author of the _Gospel according to
    the Hebrews_, a heretical product of _c._ 120, current in Greek
    among the Jewish Christians of Palestine (Ebionites).

It is indispensable to a historical appreciation of the environment out
of which any gospel has arisen that we realize that no community ever
produced and permanently adopted as its "gospel" a _partial_
presentation of the message of salvation. To its mind the writing must
have embodied, for the time at least, the message, the whole message,
and nothing but the message. Change of mind as to the essential contents
of the message would involve supplementation or alteration of the
written gospel employed. No writing of the kind would be produced with
tacit reference to some other for another aspect of the truth.

It was not, then, the mere limitation of its language which caused the
ancient Matthæan Sayings (the so-called _Logia_) to be superseded and
disappear; nor is mere "translation" the word to describe that which
took its place. The growth of Christianity in the Greek-speaking world
not only called upon Jerusalem to pour out its treasure of evangelic
tradition in the language of the empire, but stimulated a sense of its
own increasing need. That which could once be supplied by
eye-witnesses, the testimony of Jesus' mighty works, his death and
resurrection, was now fast disappearing. And simultaneously the
appreciation of its importance was growing. It was impossible to be
blind to the conquests made by the gospel _about_ Jesus. Enclosed in it,
as part of its substance the gospel _of_ Jesus found its final
resting-place, much as the mother church itself was later taken up and
incorporated in a catholic Christendom. So it is that in the Elder's
time the church of the 'apostles, elders and witnesses' have done more
than merely supersede their Aramaic(?) _Syntagma_ of the Precepts by
"translations." They had adopted alongside of it from Rome Mark's
"Memorabilia of Peter" as to "things either said or done by the Lord."
We can see indeed from the apologetic way in which 'the Elder' speaks of
Mark's limitations (Peter is not to be held responsible for the lack of
order) that Mark's authority is still held quite secondary to Matthew's;
but the very fact that his work is given authoritative standing at all,
still more the fact that it has become the framework into which the
old-time _syntagma_ has been set, marks a great and fundamental change
of view as to what constitutes "the gospel."

No mere _syntagma_ of the Precepts of Jesus has ever come down to us,
though the papyrus leaves of "Sayings of Jesus" discovered in 1897 at
Behneseh in Egypt by Grenfell and Hunt had something of this
character.[1] It was impossible that any community outside the most
primitive one, where personal "witnesses of the Lord" still survived
"until the times of Trajan," could be satisfied with a "gospel" which
gave only the precepts of Jesus without so much as an account of his
crucifixion and resurrection. And, strange as it may seem, the evidence
of Q (_i. e._ the coincident material in Matthew and Luke not derived
from Mark), as judged by nearly all critics, is that no narrative of the
kind was given in the early compilation of discourses from which this
element was mainly derived. After the "witnesses," apostolic and other,
had begun to disappear, a mere _syntagma_ of Jesus' sayings could not
suffice. It became inevitable that the precepts should be embodied in
the story. And yet we have at least two significant facts to corroborate
the intimations of ancient tradition that this combination was long
postponed. (18) When it is at last effected, and certainly in the
regions of southern Syria,[19] there is even there practically nothing
left of authentic _narrative_ material but the Petrine tradition as
compiled by Mark at Rome. Our Matthew, a Palestinian Jew, the only
writer of the New Testament who consistently uses the Hebrew Bible,
makes a theoretical reconstruction of the order of events in the
Galilean ministry, but otherwise he just incorporates Mark substantially
as it was. What he adds in the way of narrative is so meagre in amount,
and so manifestly inferior and apocryphal in character, as to prove the
extreme poverty of his resources of oral tradition of this type. Luke
has somewhat larger, and (as _literary_ products) better, narrative
additions than Matthew's; but the amount is still extremely meagre, and
often _historically_ of slight value. Some of it reappears in the
surviving fragments of the _Preaching of Peter_. To sum up, there is
outside of Mark _no_ considerable amount of historical material,
canonical or uncanonical, for the story of Jesus. This fact would be
hard to account for if in the regions where witnesses survived, the
first generation really took an interest in perpetuating narrative
tradition. (2) The _order_ of even such events as secured perpetuation
was already hopelessly lost at a time more remote than the writing of
our earliest gospel. This is true not only for Mark, as 'the Elder'
frankly confesses, but for Matthew, Luke and every one else.
Unchronological as Mark's order often is (and the tradition as to the
'casual anecdotes' agrees with the critical phenomena of the text), it
is vastly more historical than Matthew's reconstruction. On the other
hand Luke, while expressly undertaking to improve in this special
respect upon his predecessors, almost never ventures to depart from the
order of Mark, and when he does has never the support of Matthew, and
usually not that of real probability. In short, incorrect as they knew
the order of Mark to be, it was the best that could be had in the days
when evangelists began to go beyond the mere _syntagmas_, and to write
"gospels" as we understand them, or, in their own language, "the things
which Jesus began _both_ to do _and_ to teach" (Acts i. 1). From these
two great outstanding phenomena of gospel criticism alone it would be
apparent that the distinction dimly perceived in the tradition of the
Jerusalem elders reported by Papias, and indeed by many later writers,
is no illusion, but an important and vital fact.

    Footnote 18: It was superscribed "These are the ... words (_logoi_
    as in the Pastoral Epistles, not _logia_ as in Papias and Polycarp)
    which Jesus the living Lord spoke to the disciples and Thomas."

    Footnote 19: The possibility should be left open that the Greek
    Matthew was written in Egypt (cf. Matt. ii. 15), as some critics
    hold. From the point of view of the church historian, however, Egypt
    must really be classed as in "the regions of southern Syria." Its
    relations with Jerusalem were close and constant.

A third big, unexpected fact looms up as we round the capes of critical
analysis, subtracting from Matthew and Luke first the elements peculiar
to each, then that derived by each from Mark. It is a fact susceptible,
however, of various interpretation. To some it only proves either the
futility of criticism, or the worthlessness of ancient tradition. To us
it proves simply that the process of transition in Palestine, the home
of evangelic tradition, from the primitive _syntagma_ of Precepts,
framed on the plan of the Talmudic treatise known as _Pirke Aboth_, or
"Sayings of the Fathers," to the Greek type of narrative gospel, was a
longer and more complex one than has commonly been imagined. A cursory
statement of the results of critical efforts to reproduce the so-called
"second source" of Matthew and Luke (Mark being considered the first),
will serve to bring out the fact to which we refer, and at the same
time, we hope, to throw light upon the history of gospel development.

The mere process of subtraction above described to obtain the element Q
offers no serious difficulties, and for those who attach value to the
tradition of 'the Elders' it is natural to anticipate that the remainder
will show traits corresponding to the description of an apostolic
_syntagma_ of sayings of the Lord translated from the Aramaic, in short
the much-desired _Logia_ of Matthew. The actual result is disappointing
to such an expectation. The widely, though perhaps somewhat
thoughtlessly accepted equivalence Q = the _Logia_ is simply false. Q is
_not_ the _Logia_. It is not a _syntagma_, nor even a consistent whole,
and as it lay before our first and third evangelists it was not (for a
considerable part at least) in Aramaic. True, Q does consist _almost_
exclusively of discourse material, a large part of which has only
topical order, and is wholly, or mainly, destitute of narrative
connection. Also we find traces here and there of translation at some
period from the Aramaic, though not more in the Q element than in Mark.
But to those who looked for immediate confirmation of the tradition the
result has been on the whole disappointing. Some, more particularly
among English critics, have considered it to justify a falling back upon
the vaguer generalities of the once prevalent theory of oral tradition.
In reality we are simply called upon to renew the process of
discrimination. Most of the Q material has the saying-character and is
strung together with that lack of all save topical order which we look
for in a _syntagma_. But parts of it, such as the Healing of the
Centurion's servant (Matt. viii. 5-10, 13 = Luke vii. 1-10), or the
Preaching of the Baptist and Temptation Story (Matt. iii. 7-10, 12; iv.
2-11 = Luke iii. 7-9, 17; iv. 2-13), obstinately refuse to be brought
under this category. Moreover, the latter section has the unmistakable
motive of presenting Jesus _in his character and ministry_ as "the Son
of God," precisely as in Mark. It begins by introducing Jesus on the
stage at the baptism of John, after the ancient narrative outline (Acts
i. 22; x. 37 f.), and cannot be imagined as forming part of anything
else but a _narrative_ having the conclusion characteristic of our own
type of gospel. Other considerable sections of Q, such as the Question
of John's Disciples and Discourse of Jesus on those that were 'Stumbled'
in him (Matt. xi. 2-11, 16-27; Luke vii. 18-35; x. 13-22), share with
the Baptism and Temptation section not only the doctrinal motive of
commending Jesus in his person and ministry as the longed-for Son of
God, but in a number of characteristics which set them quite apart from
the general mass of precepts and parables in Q. We can here mention only
the following: (1) the coincidence in language between Matthew and Luke
is much greater in these sections of Q, often even greater than in the
sections borrowed from Mark, showing clearly the existence of a common
document written not in Aramaic, but in the Greek language. (2) This
material, unlike most of Q, has served as a source and model in many
portions of Mark. (3) It is for the most part not included in the five
great blocks into which Matthew has divided the Precepts by means of a
special concluding formula (vii. 28; xi. 1; xiii. 53; xix. 1, and xxvi.
1) but appears outside, in the form of supplements to the Markan
narrative (iii. 7--iv. 11; viii. 5-13, 18-22, xi. 2-27; xii. 38-45,
etc.). Finally (4) the Q material of this type seems to be given more
copiously by Luke than by Matthew, and with something more than mere
conjecture of his own as to its historical occasion. In fact, since it
appears that at least this element of Q was known to Mark, there is
nothing to justify exclusion from it of such material as the
Transfiguration story, though in this case it would be needful to prove
that Mark was not the source. Similarly it would be reasonable to think
of Luke's wide divergence from Mark in his story of the Passion as
occasioned by his preference for material derived from this source.
Only, since Matthew has preferred to follow Mark, we have no means of
determining whence Luke did derive his new and here often valuable
material.

The existence, then, of an element of Q which quite fails to correspond
to what we take the Matthæan _syntagma_ to have been by no means proves
either the futility of criticism or the worthlessness of the ancient
tradition. It only shows that our synoptic evangelists were not the
first to attempt the combination of discourse with narrative, but that
Luke at least had a predecessor in the field, to whom all are more or
less indebted. Criticism and tradition together show that there are two
great streams from which all historically trustworthy material has been
derived. The one is Evangelic Story, and is mainly derived from Mark's
outline of the ministry based on the anecdotes of Peter, though some
elements come from another source, principally preserved by Luke, which
we must discuss in a later chapter devoted to the growth of Petrine
story at Rome and Antioch. The other stream, "Words of the Lord," comes
from Jerusalem, and is always associated in all its forms with the name
of Matthew. We have every reason for accepting the statement that as
early as the founding of the church in Rome (45-50) the Apostle Matthew
had begun the work of compiling the Precepts of Jesus, in a form
serviceable to the object of "teaching men to observe all things
whatsoever he had commanded." Our present Gospel of Matthew, however, is
neither this work nor a translation of it; for the only three things
told us about the apostle's work are all irreconcilable with the
characteristics of our Matthew. The compilation of "Words of the Lord"
was (1) a _syntagma_ and not, like Mark, an outline of the ministry. It
was (2) written in Aramaic; whereas our Matthew is an original Greek
composition. It was (3) by an apostle who had personal acquaintance with
Jesus; whereas our first evangelist is to the last degree dependent upon
the confessedly defective story of Mark. Still if we take our Matthew as
the last link in the long chain of development, covering perhaps half a
century, and including such by-products as the _Gospel according to the
Hebrews_ and the _Gospel of the Nazarenes_, we may obtain a welcome
light upon the environment out of which has come down the work which an
able scholar justly declared, "the most important book ever written, the
Gospel according to Matthew."

The language in which it was written was alone sufficient to place the
Greek Matthew beyond all possible competition in the larger world from
Aramaic rivals. But its comprehensiveness and catholicity still further
helped it to the position which it soon attained as the most widely used
of all the gospels. Matthew is not only in its whole structure a
composite gospel, but shows in high degree the catholicizing tendency of
the times. Just as it frankly adopts the Roman-Petrine narrative of Mark
with slightest possible modification, so also it places in Peter's hand
with equal frankness the primacy in apostolic succession. Almost the
only additions it makes to Mark's account of the public ministry are the
story of Peter's walking on the sea (xiv. 28-33), and his payment of the
temple tribute for Christ and himself with the coin from the fish's
mouth (xvii. 24-27). The latter story introduces the chapter on the
exercise of rulership in "the church" (ch. xviii.), beginning with the
disciples' question: "Who _then_ is greatest in the kingdom?" Peter is
again in it the one salient figure (xviii. 21). An equally important
addition, connected with xviii. 17 f. is the famous committal to Peter
of the power of the keys, with the declaration making him for his
confession the 'Rock' foundation of "the church." This addition to
Mark's story of the rebuke of Peter at Cæsarea Philippi, is one which
decidedly alters its bearing, and seems even to borrow the very language
of Gal. i. 16 f. in order to exalt the apostleship of Peter. In fact,
the Roman gospel and the Palestinian almost reverse the rôles we should
expect Peter to play in each. Matthew alone makes Peter "the first" (x.
2), while Mark seems to take special pains to record rebukes of the
twelve and the brethren of the Lord, and especially the rebukes called
down upon themselves by Peter, or Peter and John.

In respect to the primacy of Peter we can observe a certain difference
even among the Palestinian gospels which succeeded to the primitive
_syntagma_ of Matthew. Little, indeed, is known of the orthodox _Gospel
of the Nazarenes_, beyond its relatively late and composite character;
for it borrowed from Matthew, Mark and Luke in turn. Its list of
apostles, however, begins with "John and James the sons of Zebedee,"
_then_ "Simon and Andrew," and winds up: "Thee also, Matthew, did I
call, as thou wert sitting at the seat of custom, and thou followedst
me." The anti-Pauline _Gospel according to the Hebrews_ shows its
conception of the seat of apostolic authority by giving to "James the
Just" the place of Peter as recipient of that first manifestation of the
risen Lord, which laid the foundation of the faith. Why then does the
Greek Palestinian gospel, in contrast with its rivals, lay such special
stress on the primacy of Peter?

From the cautious and (as it were) deprecatory tone of the appendix to
John (John xxi.) in seeking to commend the "other disciple whom Jesus
loved" as worthy to be accepted as a "true witness" without detriment to
the acknowledged authority of Peter as chief under-shepherd of the
flock, we may infer that not at Rome alone, but wherever there was
question of 'apostolic' tradition, the authority of Peter was coming
rapidly to the fore. The tendency at Antioch is even more marked than at
Rome, as is manifest from Acts. If, then, it seems stronger still in a
region where we should expect the authority of James to be put forward,
this need not be taken as a specifically Roman trait. We must realize
the sharp antagonism which existed in Palestine from the time of the
Apostolic council down, between (1) the consistent legalists, who
maintained down to the period of Justin (153) and the _Clementine
Homilies and Recognitions_ (180-200), their bitter hostility to Paul and
his gospel of Gentile freedom from the Law; and (2) the 'catholic,' or
liberal, Jewish-Christians, who took the standpoint of the Pillars. It
is but one of many indications of its 'catholic' tendency that our
Matthew increases the emphasis on the apostolic authority of Peter to
the point of an actual primacy. The phenomenon must be judged in the
light of the disappearance or suppression of all evangelic story save
what came under the name of Peter, and the tendency in Acts to bring
under his name even the entire apostleship to the Gentiles. Peter is not
yet in these early writings the representative of Rome, but of
_catholicity_. The issue in Matthew is not as between Rome and some
other dominant see, but (as the reflection of the language of Gal. i.
17 f. in Matt. xvi. 17 shows) as between 'catholic' apostolic
authority and the unsafe tendencies of Pauline independence.

Nevertheless, for all his leanings to catholicity the Greek Matthew has
not wholly succeeded in excluding materials which still reflect
Jewish-Christian hostility to Paul, or at least to the tendencies of
Pauline Christianity. Over and over again special additions are made in
Matthew to emphasize a warning against the workers of "lawlessness." The
exhortation of Jesus in Luke vi. 42-45 to effect (self-)reformation not
on the surface, nor in word, but by change of the inward root of
disposition fructifying in deeds, is altered in Matt. vii. 15-22 into a
warning against the "false prophets" who work "lawlessness," and who
must be judged by their fruits. They make the confession of Lordship
(_cf._ Rom. x. 9) but are not obedient to Jesus' commandment, and lack
good works. In particular the test of Mark ix. 38-40 is directly
reversed. The principle "Whosoever is not against us is for us" is not
to be trusted. A teacher may exercise the 'spiritual gifts' of prophecy,
exorcism, and miracles wrought in the name of Jesus, and still be a
reprobate. A similar (and most incongruous) addition is made to Mark's
parable of the Patient Husbandman (Mark iv. 26-29), in Matt. xiii.
24-30, and reiterated in a specially appended "interpretation" (xiii.
36-43). This addition likens the "workers of lawlessness" to tares sown
alongside the good seed of the word by "an enemy." A similar incongruous
attachment is made to the parable of the Marriage feast (Matt. xxii.
1-14; _cf._ Luke xiv. 15-24) to warn against the lack of the 'garment of
good works.' Finally, Matthew closes his whole series of the discourses
of Jesus with a group of three parables developed with great elaboration
and rhetorical effect, out of relatively slight suggestions as found
elsewhere. The sole theme of the series is the indispensableness of good
works in the judgment (Matt. 25; _cf._ Luke xii. 35-38; xix. 11-28, and
Mark ix. 37, 41). A similar interest appears in Matthew's insistence on
the permanent obligation of the Law (v. (16) 17-20; xix. 16-22--in
contrast with Mark x. 17-22), on respect for the temple (xvii. 24-27)
and on the Davidic descent of Jesus, with fulfilment of messianic
promise in him (chh. i.-ii.; ix. 27). He limits the activity of Jesus to
the Holy Land (xv. 22; contrast Mark vii. 24 f.), makes him in sending
forth the Twelve (x. 5 f.) specifically forbid mission work among
Samaritans or Gentiles, and while the prohibition is finally removed in
xxviii. 18-20, the apostolic seat cannot be removed, but remains as in
x. 23, among "the cities of Israel" to the end of the world.

There is probably no more of intentional opposition to Paul or to his
gospel in all this than in James or Luke. We cannot for example regard
it as more than accidental coincidence that in the phrase "an enemy hath
done this," in the parable of the tares, we have the same epithet which
the Ebionite literature applies to Paul. But enough remains to indicate
how strongly Jewish-Christian prejudices and limitations still affected
our evangelist. With respect to date, the atmosphere is in all respects
such as characterizes the period of the nineties.

It does not belong to our present purpose to analyze this gospel into
its constituent elements. The process can be followed in many treatises
on gospel criticism, and the results will be found summarized in
_Introductions_ to the New Testament such as the recent scholarly work
of Moffatt. We have here but to note the general character and structure
of the book as revealing the main outlines of its history and the
conditions which gave it birth.

Matthew and Luke are alike in that both represent comparatively late
attempts to combine the ancient Matthæan _syntagma_ with the
'Memorabilia of Peter' compiled by Mark. But there is a great
difference. Luke contemplates his work with some of the motives of the
historian. He adopts the method of narrative, and therefore subordinates
his discourse material to a conception (often confused enough) of
sequence in space and time. Matthew, as the structure of his gospel, no
less than his own avowal shows, had an aim more nearly corresponding to
the ancient Palestinian type. The demand for the narrative form had
become irresistible. It controlled even his later Greek and Aramaic
rivals. But Matthew has subordinated the historical to the ethical
motive. He aims at, and has rendered, just the service which his age
demanded and for which it could look to no other region than Jerusalem,
a full compilation of the commandments and precepts of Jesus.

The narrative framework is adopted from Mark without serious alteration,
because this work had already proved its effectiveness in convincing men
everywhere that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of God." Like Luke,
Matthew prefixes an account of Jesus' miraculous birth and childhood,
because in his time (_c._ 90) the ancient "beginning of the gospel" with
the baptism by John had given opportunity to the heresy of the
Adoptionists, represented by Cerinthus, who maintained that Jesus
_became_ the Son of God at his baptism, a merely temporary "receptacle"
of the Spirit. The prefixed chapters have no incarnation doctrine, and
no doctrine of pre-existence. They do not intend in their story of the
miraculous birth to relate the incoming of a superhuman or non-human
being into the world, else they could not take up the pedigree of Joseph
as exhibiting Jesus' title to the throne of David. Miracle attends and
signalizes the birth of that "Son of David" who is destined to become
the Son of God. Apart from the mere question of attendant prodigy the
aim of Matthew's story of the Infancy is such as should command the
respect and sympathy of every rational thinker. Against all Doketic
dualism it maintains that the Son of God is such from birth to death.
The presence of God's Spirit with him is not a mere counterpart to
demonic "possession," but is part of his nature as true man from the
beginning.

But the doctrinal interest of Matthew scarcely goes beyond the point of
proving that Jesus is the Christ foretold by the prophets. Doctrine as
well as history is subordinate to the one great aim of teaching men to
"observe all things whatsoever Jesus commanded."




CHAPTER VII

THE PETRINE TRADITION. EVANGELIC STORY


Of the extent to which the early church could do without narrative of
Jesus' earthly ministry we have extraordinary evidences in the
literature of Pauline Christianity on the one side and of Jewish
Christianity on the other. For Paul himself, as we know, the real story
of Jesus was a transcendental drama of the Incarnation, Redemption, and
Exaltation. It is probable that when at last "three years" after his
conversion he went up to Jerusalem "to get acquainted with Peter," the
story he was interested to hear had even then more to do with that
common apostolic witness of the resurrection appearances reproduced in
1st Cor. xv. 3-11, than with the sayings and doings of the ministry. As
to this Paul preserves, as we have seen, an almost unbroken silence. And
that which did not interest Paul, naturally did not interest his
churches.

On the other hand those who could have perpetuated a full and authentic
account of the ministry were almost incredibly slow to undertake the
task; partly, no doubt, because of their vivid expectation of the
immediate end of the world, but largely also because to their mind the
data most in need of preservation were the 'life-giving words.' The
impression of Jesus' character, his person and authority was not, as
they regarded it, a thing to be gained from the historical outline of
his career. It was established by the fact of the Resurrection, by the
predictions of the prophets, which found fulfilment in the circumstances
of Jesus' birth, particular incidents here and there in his career and
fate, but most of all in his resurrection and the gifts of the Spirit
which argued his present session at the right hand of God. Once this
authority of Jesus was established the believer had only to observe his
commandments as handed down by the apostles, elders and witnesses.

On all sides there was an indifference to such historical inquiry as the
modern man would think natural and inevitable, an indifference that must
remain altogether inexplicable to us unless we realize that until at
least the time of the fourth evangelist the main proofs of messiahship
were not looked for in Jesus' earthly career. His Christhood was thought
of as something in the future, not yet realized. Even his resurrection
and manifestation in glory "at the right hand of God," which is to both
Paul (Rom. i. 4) and his predecessors (Acts ii. 32-36) the assurance
that "God hath made him both Lord and Christ," is not yet the beginning
of his specific messianic programme. Potentially this has begun, because
Jesus has already been seated on the 'throne of glory,' "from henceforth
expecting until his enemies be made the footstool of his feet."
Practically it is not yet. The Christ is still a Christ that is to be.
His messianic rule is delayed until the subjugation of the "enemies";
and this subjugation in turn is delayed by "the long suffering of God,
who willeth not that any should perish, but that all men should come to
repentance." Meantime a special "outpouring of the Spirit" is given in
'tongues,' 'prophecies,' 'miracle working,' and the like, in fulfilment
of scriptural promise, as a kind of coronation largess to all loyal
subjects. This outpouring of the Spirit, then, is the great proof and
assurance that the Heir has really ascended the 'throne of glory' in
spite of the continuance of "all things as they were from the foundation
of the world." These 'gifts' are "firstfruits of the Spirit," pledges of
the ultimate inheritance, proofs both to believers and unbelievers of
the complete Inheritance soon to be received. But the gifts have also a
practical aspect. They are all endowments for _service_. The Great
Repentance in Israel and among the Gentiles is not to be brought about
without the co-operation of believers. The question which at once arises
when the manifestation of the risen Christ is granted, "Lord, dost thou
at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?" is therefore answered by
the assurance that the time is in God's hand alone, but that the 'gifts
of the Spirit,' soon to be imparted, are intended to enable believers to
do their part, at home and abroad, toward effecting the Great Repentance
(Acts i. 6-8).[20]

    Footnote 20: The parallel in Mark xvi. 14-18 is very instructive,
    but needs the recently discovered connection between verses 14 and
    15 to complete the sense: "And they excused themselves (for their
    unbelief) saying, This age of lawlessness and unbelief is under the
    dominion of Satan, who by means of the unclean spirits prevents the
    truth and power of God from being apprehended. On this account
    reveal thy righteousness (_i. e._ justice, in the sense of Isa. lvi,
    1 _b_) even now. And Christ replied to them, The limit of years of
    Satan's power is (already) fulfilled, but other terrible things are
    at hand; moreover I was delivered up to death on behalf of sinners
    in order that they might return unto the truth and sin no more, that
    they might inherit the spiritual and incorruptible glory which is in
    heaven." Then follows the mission into all the world and endowment
    with the gifts.

For a church which felt itself endowed with living and present evidences
of the messianic power of Jesus it was naturally only a second thought
(and not a very early one at that) to look back for proof to occurrences
in Jesus' life in Galilee, however notable his career as "a prophet
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people." The _present_
gifts of his power would be (at least in demonstrative effect) "greater
works than these." With those who had the resurrection testimony of 1st
Cor. xv. 3-11, and even the recurrent experience of "visions and
revelations of the Lord," anticipatory revelations of his messiahship,
utterances, like that to Peter at Cæsarea Philippi, wherein Jesus only
predicted the great work to be divinely accomplished through him,
whether by life or death, in going up to Jerusalem, intimations which
had been disregarded or disbelieved at the time, could not rank with
present knowledge, experience and insight. They would be recalled merely
as confirmatory foregleams of "the true light that now shineth," as the
two who had received the manifestation at Emmaus exclaim, "Did not our
heart burn within us while he talked to us in the way?"

We could not indeed psychologically account for the development of the
resurrection faith after the crucifixion, if before it Jesus' life and
utterances had not been such as to make his manifestation in glory seem
to the disciples just what they _ought_ to have expected. But,
conversely, nothing is more certain than the fact that they _did not_
expect it; and that when the belief had become established by other
means, the attitude toward the "sayings and doings" maintained by those
who had them to relate--as we know, the most successful missionary of
all felt it no handicap to be entirely without them--was one of looking
back into an obscure past for things whose pregnant significance became
appreciable only in the light of present knowledge. "These things
understood not his disciples at the first, but when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things had been written of him, and that
they had done these things unto him."

We are fortunate in having even one example of the "consecutive
narratives" (_diegeses_) referred to in Luke i. 1. Our Mark is a gospel
written purely and simply from this point of view, aiming only to show
how the earthly career of Jesus gave evidence that this was the Son of
God, predestined to exaltation to the right hand of power, with little
attempt, if any, to bring in the precepts of the New Law. We should
realize, however, that this is already a beginning in the process soon
to become controlling, a process of carrying back into the earthly life
of Jesus in Galilee of first this trait, then that, then all the
attributes of the glorified Lord.

Ancient and reliable tradition informs us that this first endeavour to
tell the story of "Jesus Christ the Son of God" was composed at Rome by
John Mark, a former companion of both Peter and Paul, from data drawn
from the anecdotes casually employed by Peter in his preaching. There is
much to confirm this in the structure, the style, and the doctrinal
object and standpoint of the Gospel.

To begin with, the date of composition cannot be far from 75. Mark is
not only presupposed by both Matthew and Luke, but in their time had
already acquired an extraordinary predominance. To judge by what
remains to us of similar products, Mark in its own field might almost be
said to reign supreme and reign alone. Such almost exclusive supremacy
could not have been attained, even by a writing commonly understood to
represent the preaching of Peter, short of a decade or more of years. On
the other hand we have the reluctant testimony of antiquity, anxious to
claim as much as possible of apostolic authority for the record, but
unwilling to commit Peter to apparent contradictions of Matthew, that it
was written after Peter's death (64-5).[21] Internal evidence would in
fact bring down the date of the work in its present form a full decade
thereafter. It is true that there are many structural evidences of more
than one form of the narrative, and that the apocalyptic chapter (ch.
xiii.), which furnishes most of the evidence of date, may well belong
among the later supplements. But in the judgment of most critics this
'eschatological discourse' (almost the only connected discourse of the
Gospel) is clearly framed in real retrospect upon the overthrow of
Jerusalem and the temple, and the attendant tribulation on "those that
are in Judæa." The writer applies a general saying of Jesus known to us
from other sources about destroying and rebuilding the temple
specifically to the demolition effected by Titus (70). He warns his
readers in the same connection that "the end" is not to follow
immediately upon the great Judæan war, but only when the powers of evil
in the heavenly places, powers inhabiting sun, moon and stars, are
shaken (xiii. 21-27). The Pauline doctrine of 2nd Thess. ii. 1-12 is
adopted, but with careful avoidance of the prediction that the "man of
sin" is to appear "in the temple of God." Paul's "man of sin" is now
identified with Daniel's "abomination that maketh desolate" (Dan. xii.
11), which therefore is spoken of as "he" (masculine). "His" appearance
will prelude the great Judæan tribulation; but his standing place is
ill-defined. It is only "where he ought not." Matthew (following his
usual practice) returns more nearly to the language of Daniel. With him
the "Abomination" is again an object standing "in _a_ holy place." But
Matthew is already applying the prophecy to another tribulation still to
come. He does not see that Mark refers to the sack of Jerusalem on which
he himself looks back in his addition to the parable of the Supper
(Matt. xxii. 6 f.; _cf._ Luke xiv. 15-24), but takes Mark xiii. 14-23
as Jesus' prediction of a great final tribulation _still to come_.

    Footnote 21: So Irenæus (186) and (by implication) Papias. Clement
    of Alexandria (210) meets the difficulty by alleging that Peter was
    still alive, but gave no aid to the writer.

Mark's crudities of language and style, his frequent latinisms, his
explanation to his readers (almost contemptuously exaggerated) of Jewish
purifications and distinctions of meats (vii. 3 f.), presupposition
of the Roman form of divorce (x. 12), explanation in Roman money of the
value of the (Greek and Oriental) "mite" (_lepton_), are well-known
confirmations of the tradition of the writing's place of origin. But
these are superficial characteristics. More important for us to note is
the fundamental conception of what constitutes "the gospel," and the
writer's attitude on questions of the relation of Jew and Gentile and
the authority of the apostles and kindred of the Lord.

The most striking characteristic of Mark is that it aims to present the
gospel _about_ Jesus, and is relatively indifferent to the gospel _of_
Jesus. Had the writer conceived his task after the manner of a Matthew
there is little doubt that he could have compiled catechetic discourses
of Jesus like the Sermon on the Mount or the discourse on prayer of Luke
xi. 1-13. The fact that he disregards such records of Jesus' ethical and
religious instruction does not mean that he (tacitly) refers his readers
to the Matthæan Precepts, or similar compilations, to supplement his own
deficiencies. It means a different, more Pauline, conception of what
"the gospel" is. Mark conceives its primary element to be attachment to
the _person_ of Jesus, and has already gone far toward obliterating the
primitive distinction between a Jesus whose earthly career had been "in
great humility," and the glorified Son of God. The earthly Jesus is
still, it is true, only a man endowed with the Spirit of Adoption. But
he is so completely "in" the Spirit, and so fully endowed with it, as
almost to assume the Greek figure of a demi-god treading the earth
incognito. No wonder this Gospel became the favourite of the
Adoptionists and Doketists.

Mark does not leave his reader in the dark as to what a man must do to
inherit eternal life. The requirement does not appear until after Jesus
has taken up with the twelve the road to Calvary, because it is
distinctly _not_ a keeping of commandments, new or old. It is an
adoption of "the mind that was in Christ, who humbled himself and became
obedient unto death." In Matthew's 'improved' version of Jesus' answer
to the rich applicant for eternal life, the suppliant is told he may
obtain it by obeying the commandments, with supererogatory merit ("if
thou wouldest be perfect"), if he follows Jesus' example of
self-abnegating service. In the form and context from which Matthew
borrows (Mark x. 13-45) there is no trace of this legalism, and the
whole idea of supererogatory merit, or higher reward, is strenuously,
almost indignantly, repudiated. No man can receive the kingdom at all
who does not receive it "as a little child." Every man must be prepared
to make every sacrifice, even if he has kept all the commandments from
his youth up. Peter and the disciples who have "left all and followed"
are in respect to reward on the same level as others. Peter's plea for
the twelve is answered, "There is no man that hath left" earthly
possessions for Christ's sake that is not amply compensated even here.
He must expect persecution now, but will receive eternal life hereafter.
Only "many that are first shall be last, and last first." Even the
martyr-apostles James and John will have no superior rights in the
Kingdom.

Such passages as the above not only reveal why Mark's gospel shows
comparative disregard of the Precepts, but also displays an attitude
toward the growing claims of apostolic authority and neo-legalism which
in contrast with Matthew and Luke is altogether refreshing. The kindred
of the Lord appear but twice (iii. 20 f., 31-35 and vi. 1-6), both
times in a wholly unfavourable light. John appears but once, and that to
receive a rebuke for intolerance. James and John appear only to be
rebuked for selfish ambition. Peter seldom otherwise than for rebuke.
All the disciples show constantly the blindness and "hardness of heart"
which is explicitly said to characterize their nation (vi. 52; vii. 18;
viii. 12, 14-21). Their self-seeking and unfaithfulness is the foil to
Jesus' self-denial and faithfulness (viii. 33; ix. 6, 18 f., 29; x.
24, 28, 32, 37, 41; xiv. 27-31, 37-41, 50, 66-72). That which in Matthew
(xvi. 16-19) has become a special divine revelation to Peter of the
messiahship, marking the foundation of the church, is in the earlier
Markan form (Mark viii. 27-33) not a revelation of the messiahship at
all. Peter's answer, "Thou are the Christ," is common knowledge. The
twelve are not supposed to be more ignorant than the demons! There is,
however, a caustic rebuke of Peter for his carnal, Jewish idea of the
implications of Christhood. A revelation of its significance almost
Doketic in character is indeed granted just after to "Peter, James and
John"; but they remain without appreciation or understanding of the
'vision,' though it exhibits Jesus in his heavenly glory in company with
the translated heroes of the Old Testament. The revelation still
remains, therefore, a sealed book until "after the resurrection."

This exaggeration of the disciples' obtuseness is partly due, no doubt,
to apologetic motives. The evangelist has to meet the objection, If
Jesus was really the extraordinary, superhuman being represented, and
was openly proclaimed such by the evil spirits, why was nothing heard of
his claims until after the crucifixion and alleged resurrection? His
carrying back into the Galilean ministry of the glorified Being of
Paul's redemption doctrine compels him to represent the twelve as
sharing the dullness of the people who "having eyes see not, and having
ears hear not." But with all allowance for this, the Roman Gospel shows
small consideration for the apostles and kindred of the Lord.

It shows quite as little for Jewish prerogative and Jewish law. Jesus
speaks in parables because to those "without" his preaching is to be
intentionally a 'veiled' gospel (iv. 1-34). The Inheritance will be
taken away from them and given to others (xii. 1-12). Priests and people
together were guilty of the rejection and murder of Jesus (xv. 11-15,
29-32). Forgiveness of sins is offered by Jesus on his own authority in
defiance of the scribes. Their exclusion of the publicans and sinners he
disregards, proclaims abolition of their fasts, and holds their
sabbath-keeping up to scorn (ii. 1--iii. 6). On the question of
distinctions of meats his position is the most radical possible. The
Jewish ceremonial is a "vain worship," mere "commandments of men."
Defilement cannot be contracted by what "goes into a man." Jesus' saying
about inward purity was not aimed at the mere 'hedge of the Law' (Matt.
xv. 13), nor the mere matter of ablutions (Matt. xv. 20), but was
intended to "make all meats clean" (vii. 1-23). Moses' law in some of
its enactments does not represent the real divine will, but a human
accommodation to human weakness (x. 2-9). Obedience to its highest code
does not ensure eternal life (x. 19-21). The single law of love is "much
more than all whole burnt offering and sacrifices" (xii. 28-34). When
_all_ the references to Judaism, its Law, its institutions, and its
prerogative, are of this character, when Jesus _always_ appears in
radical opposition to the Law and its exponents (xii. 38-40; xiii. 1
f.), _never_ as their supporter in any degree, the evangelist comes
near to making it too hard for us to believe that he really was of
Jewish birth.

On the other hand we cannot doubt the statement that he derives his
anecdotes, however indirectly, from the preaching of Peter. The prologue
(i. 1-13), indeed, makes no pretence of reporting the testimony of any
witness, but acquaints the reader with the true nature of Jesus as "the
Christ, the Son of God" by means of a mystical account of his baptism
and endowment with the Spirit of Adoption, probably resting upon that
document of Q, which we have distinguished from the Precepts. But the
ensuing story of the ministry opens at the home of Peter in Capernaum,
and continues more or less connected therewith in spite of interjected
groups of anecdotes whose connection is not chronological but topical,
such as ii. 1--iii. 6; iii. 22-30; iv. 1-34. It reaches its climax where
Jesus at Cæsarea Philippi takes Peter into his confidence. Here again
the mystical Revelation or Transfiguration vision (ix. 2-10) interrupts
the connection, and shows its foreign derivation by the transcendental
sense in which it interprets the person of Jesus. Certain features
suggest its having been taken from the same source as the prologue (i.
1-13).

The story issues in the tragedy at Jerusalem, where, as before, Peter's
figure, however unfavourable the contrast in which it is set to that of
Jesus, is still the salient one. The outline in general is identical
with that so briefly sketched in Acts x. 38-42--_except_ that the
absolutely essential point, the one thing which no gospel narrative can
possibly have lacked, the resurrection manifestation to the disciples,
and the commission to preach the gospel, is absolutely lacking!

That Mark's gospel once contained such a conclusion is almost a
certainty. Imagine a gospel narrative without a report of the
manifestation of the risen Lord to his disciples! Imagine a church--and
that the church at _Rome_--giving out as the first, the authentic,
original, and (in intention) the only account of the origin of the
Christian faith (Mark i. 1), a narrative which _ended_ with the apostles
scattered in cowardly desertion, and Peter the most conspicuous, most
remorseful renegade of them all! He who writes in Peter's name from Rome
but shortly after, affectionately naming Mark "my son," must have had
indeed a forgiving spirit. But traces of the real sequel have not all
disappeared. Many outside allusions still remain to the turning again of
Peter and stablishing of his brethren in the resurrection faith. The
earliest is Paul's (1st Cor. xv. 5). The present Mark itself implies
that it once had such an ending; for Jesus promises to rally his flock
in Galilee after he is raised up (xiv. 28), and the women at the
sepulchre are bidden to remind the disciples of the promise, though
they fail to deliver their message. Indeed the whole Gospel looks
forward to it. To this end "the mystery of the kingdom" is given to the
chosen twelve (iii. 13 f., 31-35; iv. 10-12); for this they are
forewarned (though vainly) of the catastrophe (viii. 34--ix. 1, 30-32;
x. 32-34; xiv. 27-31). In fact the promise of a baptism of the Spirit
(i. 8) probably implies that the original sequel related not only the
appearance to Peter and (later) to the rest with the charge to preach,
but also their endowment with the gifts, perhaps as in John xx. 19-23.
What we now have is only a substitute for this original sequel, a
substitute so ill-fitting as to have provoked repeated attempts at
improvement.

From xvi. 8 onwards, as is well known, the oldest textual authorities
have simply a blank. Later authorities give a shorter or longer
substitute for the missing Manifestation and Charge to the twelve. The
shorter follows Matthew, the longer follows Luke, with traces of
acquaintance with John. Fanciful theories to explain these textual
phenomena, such as accidental mutilation of the only copy, are
improbable, and do not explain. If conjecture be permissible it is more
likely that the original work was in two parts, after the manner of
Luke-Acts, the 'former treatise' ending with the centurion's testimony,
"Truly this man was a Son of God" (xv. 39). The second part continued
the narrative in the form of a Preaching of Peter, perhaps ending with
his coming to Rome; for the ancient literature of the church had several
narratives of this type. Its disappearance will have been due to the
superseding (perhaps the embodiment) of it by the work of Luke. When the
primitive Markan 'former treatise' was adapted for separate use as a
gospel it was quite natural that it should be supplemented (we can
hardly say "completed") by the addition of the story of the Empty
Sepulchre (xv. 40--xvi. 8), though this narrative is quite unknown to
the primitive resurrection preaching (_cf._ 1st Cor. xv. 3-11), and one
in which every character save Pilate is a complete stranger to the body
of the work. The subsequent further additions of the so-called "longer"
and "shorter" endings belong to the history of transcription after A.D.
140.

It will be apparent from the above that the Gospel of Mark is no
exception to the rule that church-writings of this type inevitably
undergo recasting and supplementation until the advancing process of
canonization at last fixes their text with unalterable rigidity. Whether
we recognize "sources," or earlier "forms," or only earlier "editions"
of Mark, it is certain that appendices could still be attached long
after the appearance of Luke, and probable that in the early period of
its purely local currency at Rome the fund of Petrine anecdote had
received more than one adaptation of form before it was carried to
Syria and embodied substantially as we now have it in the composite
gospels of Matthew and Luke. The omission by Luke of Mark vi. 45--viii.
26 is intentional,[22] and cannot be used to prove the existence of a
shorter form; and the same is probably true of the omission of Mark ix.
38-40 by Matthew. Mark xii. 41-44, however, is probably an addition
later than Matthew's time. Neither Matthew nor Luke had a text extending
beyond xvi. 8. But signs of acquaintance with the original sequel appear
in the appendix to John (John xxi.) and in the late and composite
_Gospel of Peter_ (_c._ 140). According to the latter the twelve
remained in Jerusalem scattered and in hiding for the remaining six days
of the feast. At its close they departed, mourning and grieving, each
man to his own home. Peter and a few others, including "Levi the son of
Alpheus," resumed their fishing "on the sea." ... The fragment breaks
off at this point. The story may be conjecturally completed from 1st
Cor. xv. 5-8, with comparison of John xxi. 1-13; Luke v. 4-8; xxii. 31
f.; xxiv. 34, 36-43.

    Footnote 22: See below.

As we look back upon the undertaking of this humble author, named only
by tradition, one among the catechists of the great church of Paul and
Peter, writing but a few years after their death, but a few years before
1st Peter and Hebrews, one is struck by the grandeur of his aim. It is
true he was not wholly without predecessors in the field. The work
which afforded him at least the substance of his prologue, and in all
probability other considerable sections of his book, had already aimed
in a more mystical way to connect the Pauline doctrine of Christ as the
Wisdom of God with the mighty works and teachings of Jesus. Duplication
of a considerable part of Mark's story (vii. 31--viii. 26 repeats with
some variation vi. 30--vii. 30) shows that his work was one of
combination as well as creation. But outline, proportion and onward
march of the story show not only skill and care, but large-minded and
consistent adherence to the fundamental plan to tell the origin of the
Christian faith (Mark i. 1).

Confirmation of the belief and practice of the church--it is for this
that Mark reports all he can learn of the years of obscurity in Galilee
followed by the tragedy in Jerusalem. Not only belief in Jesus as the
Son of God will be justified by the story, but the founding,
institutions, and ritual of the existing church. He manifestly adapts it
to show not only the superhuman powers and attributes of the chosen Son
of God, but the germ and type of all the church's institutions. Its
baptism of repentance and accompanying gift of the Spirit of Adoption
only repeats the experience of Jesus at the baptism of John. Endowment
with the word of wisdom and the word of power is but the counterpart of
Jesus' divine equipment with "the power of the Spirit" when he taught
and healed in Galilee. The Sending of the Twelve sets the standard for
the church's evangelists and missionaries, just as the Breaking of the
Bread in Galilee gives the model for its fraternal banquet. So for the
Judæan ministry as well. The path of martyrdom is that which all must
follow, its Passover Supper of the Lord and Vigil in Gethsemane are
models for the church's annual observance, its Passover of the Lord, its
Vigil, its Resurrection feast. The grouping of the anecdotes is not all
of Mark's doing, for we can still see in many cases how they have grown
up around the church observances, to explain and justify the rites,
rather than to form part of an outlined career. But taking the work as a
whole, and considering how far beyond that of any other church was the
opportunity at Rome, where Paul had transmitted the lofty conception of
the Son of God, and Peter the concrete tradition of his earthly life, we
cannot wonder that Mark's outline so soon became the standard account of
Jesus' earthly ministry, and ultimately the only one.

But little space remains in which to trace the developments of gospel
story in other fields. Southern Syria and Egypt soon found it needful,
as we have seen, to adopt the work of Mark, but independently and as a
framework for the Matthæan Precepts. It cannot have been long after that
Antioch and Northern Syria followed suit. For Luke, though acquainted
with the work of 'many' predecessors gives no sure evidence of
acquaintance with Matthew. When we find such unsoftened contradictions
as those displayed between these two Greek gospels in their opening and
closing chapters, and observe, moreover, that while both indulge in
hundreds of corrections and improvements upon Mark, these are rarely
coincident and never make the assumption of interdependence necessary,
it is hard to resist the conclusion that neither evangelist was directly
acquainted with the other's work. Now no other gospel compares with
Matthew in the rapidity and extent of its circulation, while Luke
declares himself a diligent inquirer. He could not ignore the claims of
apostolic authority to which this early and wide acceptance of Matthew
were mainly due. The inference is reasonable that Luke's date was but
little later than that of Matthew. If the probability of his employment
of the _Antiquities_ of Josephus could be raised to a certainty this
would suffice to date the Gospel and Book of Acts not earlier than 96.
Internal and external evidence, as judged by most scholars, converge on
a date approximating 100.

The North-Syrian derivation of Luke-Acts is less firmly established in
tradition than the Roman origin of Mark and the South-Syrian of Matthew.
Ancient tradition can point to nothing weightier than the statement of
Eusebius, drawn we know not whence, but independently made in the
argumenta (prefixed descriptions) of several Vulgate manuscripts that
Luke was of Antiochian birth. However, internal evidence supplies
corroboration in rather unusual degree. If the reading of some texts in
Acts xi. 28, "And as we were assembled," could be accepted, this alone
would be almost conclusive corroboration. But dubious as it is, it
furnishes support. For if an alteration of the original, it is at any
rate extremely early (_c._ 150?) and aimed to support the belief in
question.[23] Moreover the whole attitude of Luke-Acts in respect to
apostolic authority, settlement of the great question of the terms of
fellowship between Jew and Gentile, and description of the founding of
the Pauline churches, is such as to make its origin anywhere between the
Taurus range and the Adriatic most improbable; while if we place it in
Rome we shall have an insoluble problem in the relation of its extreme
emphasis on apostolic authority, and quasi-deification of Peter, to the
stalwart independence of Mark. Conversely there are many individual
traits which suggest Antioch as the place of origin. Next to Jerusalem,
the never-to-be-forgotten church of "the apostles and elders," Antioch
is the mother church of Christendom. There the name "Christian" had its
origin. There the work of converting the Gentiles was begun. The Greek
churches of Cyprus and Asia Minor are regarded as dependencies of
Antioch. Even those of the Greek peninsula are linked as well as may be
to Antioch and Jerusalem, with suppression of the story of the schism.
Antioch, not the Pauline Greek churches, is the benefactress of "the
poor saints in Jerusalem," and at the instance of Antioch, by appeal to
"the apostles and elders," the "decrees" are obtained which permanently
settle the troublesome question of the obligation of maintaining
ceremonial cleanness which still rests upon "the Jews which are among
the Gentiles." As we have seen, the settlement is as far from that of
Mark and the Pauline churches on the one side, as from the thoroughgoing
legalism of Jerusalem on the other. As late as the Pastoral Epistles
abstinence from "meats which God created to be received with
thanksgiving by them that believe and know the truth" is to the Pauline
churches a "doctrine of devils and seducing spirits" taught "through the
hypocrisy of men that speak lies." Distinctions of meats belong to
Jewish superstition, because "every creature of God is good and nothing
is to be rejected, if it be received with thanksgiving" (1st Tim. iv.
1-5). Mark, as we have seen, takes precisely this standpoint. He is
equally radical in condemning distinctions of meats as essentially "vain
worship," and a "commandment of men" (Mark vii. 1-23). In truth if we
distinguish one of Luke's _sources_ from Luke himself we shall find
exactly this doctrine taught to Peter himself by special divine
revelation in Acts x. 10-16; xi. 3-10. Only, as we have already seen (p.
59, note), this is not the application made by the Book of Acts, as it
now stands, of the material. To 'Luke' nothing could be more repugnant
than the idea of an apostle forsaking the religion of his fathers, of
which circumcision and "the customs" are an essential part. His
cancellation, in the story of Peter's revelation and the Apostle's
subsequent defence of it before the church in Jerusalem, of one of its
essential factors, viz. the right to _eat_ with Gentiles, regardless of
man-made distinctions of meats ("what _God_ hath cleansed make not
_thou_ common") is quite as significant as his restriction of even
Paul's activity to Greek-speaking _Jews_, until "the Spirit" has
expressly directed the church in Antioch, immediately after the
persecution of Agrippa I, to proceed with the propaganda. Both
alterations of the earlier form of the story are in line with a
multitude of minor indications, and furnish us, in combination with
them, the real keynote of the narrative. In Luke-Acts more clearly than
in any of the gospels the writer assumes the distinctive function of the
_historian_. He, too, would relate, like Mark, the origin of the
Christian faith, and that "from the very first." He even deduces the
pedigree of Jesus from "Adam, which was the son of God." But the object
is far more to prove the pedigree of the faith than the pedigree of
Jesus. Christianity is to be defended against the charge of being a
_nova superstitio_, a _religio illicita_. On the contrary it is the one
true and revealed religion, the perfect flower and consummation of
Judaism. Yet it is not, like Judaism, particularistic and national, but
universal; for while God at first made that nation the special
repository of his truth, it was his "determinate foreknowledge and
counsel" that they should reject and crucify their Messiah, making it
possible to "proclaim this salvation unto the Gentiles." The one thing
Luke is so anxiously concerned to prove that he wearies the reader with
constant reiteration of it, proclaims it, argues it, in season and out
of season, with his sources, against his sources, with the facts,
against the facts, is that this faith was never, never, offered to the
Gentiles except by express direction of God and after the Jews had
demonstrated to the last extremity of stiff-necked opposition that they
would have none of it. Christianity, then, and not Judaism, is the true
primitive and revealed religion, the heir of all the divine promises.

    Footnote 23: Note, also, how in Acts vi. 5 the list of
    deacon-evangelists concludes "and Nicholas _a proselyte of
    Antioch_."

We can see now why Luke finds it impossible to adopt Mark's story of a
missionary journey of Jesus in "the coasts of Tyre and Sidon" and will
not even mention the name of Cæsarea Philippi. His method in omitting
Mark vi. 45--viii. 26 is more radical than Matthew's, but his motive is
similar. The central theme of this portion of Mark appears in the
chapter (ch. vii.) recording Jesus' repudiation of the Jewish
distinctions of clean and unclean as "precepts of men," and departing to
heal and preach in phoenecia and Decapolis. This is the theme of Luke's
second treatise; and, as we have seen, his solution of the problem is
radically different. If he cannot admit that even Paul disregarded "the
customs" or Peter preached to Gentiles until after express and
reiterated direction of "the Spirit," we surely ought not to expect him
to admit the statement that Jesus repudiated the distinctions of
Mosaism, declared "all meats clean," and departing into the coasts of
Tyre and Sidon first healed the daughter of "a Gentile" and afterward
continued his journey "through Sidon" and "the regions of Decapolis,"
repeating the symbolic miracles of opening deaf ears and blind eyes, and
feeding with loaves and fishes. Even if this supposed ministry of Jesus
among the Gentiles stood on a much stronger foundation of historical
probability than is unfortunately the case (_cf._ Rom. xv. 8), it could
not logically be admitted to the work of Luke without an abandonment of
one of his firmest convictions and a rewriting of both his treatises.

Luke was probably not the first to divide his work into a "former
treatise" covering "both" the sayings and doings of Jesus "until the
time that he was taken up," and a second devoted to the work of the
apostles after they had received the charge to proclaim the gospel "to
the uttermost parts of the earth." "Many," as he tells us, had already
undertaken to "draw up narratives" (_diegeses_) of this kind, of which
the one Luke himself has chiefly employed, had originally, as we
concluded, a sequel like his own Book of Acts. There are even features
of the Petrine source of Acts which particularly connect it with Roman
doctrine (_e. g._ Acts x. 10-15; _cf._ Rom. xiv. 14 and Mark vii. 18
f.) and even with the person of Mark (Acts xii. 12). Its balance
between Peter and Paul and its close with the establishment of
Christianity at Rome, are also suggestive that the greater part of
Luke's second treatise came _ultimately_ from the same source as his
first. But the division of the work into two parts: (1) the gospel among
the Jews; (2) the gospel among the Gentiles, would have followed,
independently of any such precedent, from the whole purpose and
structure of the work. Christianity is to be proved in the light of its
origin, and in spite of the hostility of the Jews among whom it arose,
and whose sacred writings it adopts, to be the original, true, revealed
religion. To prove this it must be shown that the rejection and
crucifixion of Jesus by his own people as a result of his earthly
ministry was due not to his own failure to meet the ideal of the
Scriptures in question, but to _their_ perversity and wilful blindness.
If it is important to prove in the former treatise that the opposition
of the controlling authorities among the Jews was due to this perversity
and jealousy, it is at least equally so to show that the lowly and
devout received him gladly. Hence the peculiar hospitality of Luke
toward material showing Jesus' acceptance of and by the humbler and the
outcast classes, the poor and lowly, women, Samaritans, publicans and
sinners. The idyllic scenes of his birth and childhood are cast among
men and women of this type of Old Testament piety, quietly "waiting for
the kingdom of God." During his career it is these who receive and hang
upon him. Even on Calvary _one_ of the thieves must join with this
throng of devout and penitent believers. Jesus' preaching begins with
his rejection by his own fellow-townsmen only because "no prophet is
accepted in his own country"; though before their attempt to slay him he
proves from Scripture how Elijah and Elisha had been sent unto the
Gentiles. His ministry ends with his demonstration to the disciples
after his resurrection from "Moses and all the prophets" how that "it
was needful that the Christ should suffer before entering his glory,"
and that after his rejection by Israel "repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem."

The second treatise shows how this purpose of God to secure the
dissemination of the true faith by the disobedience and hardening of its
first custodians was accomplished, chief stress being always laid upon
the fact that it was only when the Jews "contradicted and blasphemed"
that the apostles said, "It was necessary that the word of God should
first be spoken to you, but seeing ye put it from you, and judge
yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." There
is no interest taken in the subsequent fortunes of Jerusalem and Jewish
Christianity, nor even in the fate of Peter and James, after this
transition has been effected to Gentile soil. There is no interest taken
in the spread of Christianity as such, in Egypt, Ethiopia, Cyrenaica,
Cyprus, Mesopotamia; but only where the conflict rages over the
respective claim of Jew and Gentile to be the true heir of the promises,
_i. e._ the mission-field of Paul. At the individual centres the story
goes just far enough to relate how the gospel was offered to the Jews
and rejected, compelling withdrawal from the synagogue, and thereafter
it is told over again with slight variations at the next centre. The
book concludes with a repetition of the stereotyped scene at Rome
itself, in spite of the representation of the very source employed, that
an important church had long existed there before Paul's coming, ending
with a quotation of the classic passage from Isa. vi. 9 f. to prove
God's original purpose to harden the heart of Israel, so that his
"salvation might be sent unto the Gentiles." The very fate of Paul
himself has so little interest for Luke in comparison with this
demonstration of Christianity as the one original, revealed religion,
enclosed in Judaism as seeds are confined in the hardening seed-pod
until disseminated by its bursting, that he leaves it unmentioned, like
that of all other leaders of the church whose death was not directly
contributory to the process.

Many, and vitally important to the development of Gospel Story as we
know it, as were the sources of Luke, both by his own statement (Luke i.
1) and the internal evidences of his work, he has made analysis
extremely difficult by the skilful and elaborate stylistic embroidery
with which he has overlaid the gaps and seams. Nor is this a proper
occasion for entering the field of the higher critic. Luke-Acts
represents the completed development, not the naïve beginnings of this
type of the Literature of the Church Teacher. We have seen reason to
think we may have traces of the earlier "narratives" (_diegeses_) to
which Luke refers, not only in the great Roman work of Mark, but in a
part of the Q material itself. If Antioch were the place of origin of
this early source, if here too were found those archives of missionary
activity whence came the famous Diary employed in Acts xvi.-xxviii., the
contribution of this church to Gospel Story was such as to make Antioch
the appropriate centre for the great "historical" school of
interpretation of the fourth and fifth centuries. When we consider the
dominant motive of Luke and his extraordinary exaltation of 'apostolic'
authority we seem to be breathing the very atmosphere of Ignatius the
great apostle of ecclesiasticism and apostolic order, discipline and
succession. Ignatius' hatred of Doketism, too, is not without a certain
anticipation in the opening and closing chapters of Luke's Gospel, and
perhaps in the fact that the great exsection from Mark begins with the
story of the Walking on the Sea (Mark vi. 45-52).




CHAPTER VIII

THE JOHANNINE TRADITION. PROPHECY


In Paul's enumeration of the "gifts" by which the Spirit qualifies
various classes of men to build in various ways upon the structure of
the church, the class of "prophets" takes the place next after that of
"apostles," a rank even superior (as more manifestly 'spiritual') to
that of "pastors and teachers." The Book of Acts shows us as its most
conspicuous centre of "prophecy" the house of Philip the Evangelist at
Cæsarea. This man had four unmarried daughters who prophesied, and in
his house Paul received a 'prophetic' warning of his fate from a certain
Agabus who had come down from Judæa. There were also prophets in Antioch
(Acts xiii. 1), though the only ones mentioned by name are this same
Agabus[24] and Silas, or Silvanus, who is also from Judæa. In the
_Teaching of the Twelve_ the 'prophet' still appears among the regular
functionaries of the church, for the most part a traveller from place
to place, and open to more or less suspicion, as is the case at Rome,
where Hermas combines reverence for the "angel" that speaks through the
true prophet, with warnings against the self-seeker. In 1st John the
"false prophets" are a serious danger, propagating Doketic heresy
wherever they go. In fact, this heresy was, as we know, the great peril
in Asia. However, Asia, if plagued by wandering false prophets, had also
become by this time a notable seat of true and authentic prophecy; for
the same Papias who shows such sympathy with Polycarp against those who
were "perverting the Sayings of the Lord to their own lusts," and had
turned, as Polycarp advised, "to the tradition handed down from the
beginning," had similar means for counteracting those who "denied the
resurrection and judgment." Among those upon whom he principally relied
as exponents of the apostolic doctrine were two of those same
prophesying daughters of Philip the Evangelist, who with their father
had migrated from Cæsarea Palestina to Hierapolis, leaving, however,
one, who had married, a resident till her death at Ephesus. As late as
the time of Montanus (150-170), the "Phrygians" traced their succession
of prophets and prophetesses back to Silvanus and the daughters of
Philip.

    Footnote 24: The mention of Agabus, however, in xi. 27 f. is
    hardly consistent with xiii. 1 and xxi. 10-14. It seems to be due to
    the editorial recasting of xi. 22-30.

We cannot be sure that the traditions Papias reported from these
prophetesses were derived at first hand, though it is not impossible
that Papias himself may have seen them. However it is certain that many
of his traditions of 'the Elders' had to do with eschatology, and aimed
to prove the material and concrete character of the rewards of the
kingdom; for we have several examples of these traditions, attributing
to Jesus apocryphal descriptions of the marvellous fertility of
Palestine in the coming reign of Messiah, and particularizing about the
abodes of the blessed. Moreover Eusebius blames Papias for the crude
ideas of Irenæus and other second century fathers who held the views
called "chiliastic" (_i. e._ based on the "thousand" year reign of
Christ in Rev. xx. 2 f.). We also know that Papias defended the
"trustworthiness" of Revelation, a book which served as the great
authority of the "chiliasts" for the next fifty years in their fight
against the deniers of the resurrection. He quoted from it, in fact, the
passage above referred to; so that if reason must be sought for his
placing "John and Matthew" together at the end of his list of seven
apostles instead of in their usual place, it is probably because they
were his ultimate apostolic authorities for the "word of prophecy" and
for the "commandment of the Lord" respectively. Justin Martyr, Papias'
contemporary at Rome, though converted in Ephesus, and unquestionably
determined in his mould of thought by Asiatic Paulinism, has, like
Papias, but two _authorities_ for his gospel teaching: (1) the
commandment of the Lord represented in the Petrine and Matthæan
tradition; (2) prophecy, represented in the Christian continuation of
the Old Testament gift. This second authority, however, is not appealed
to without the support of apostolicity. Revelation is quoted as among
"our writings," like "the memorabilia of the apostles called Gospels,"
but not without the additional assurance that the seer was "John, one of
the _apostles_ of Christ."

For 'prophecy,' however acclimated elsewhere, was in its origin
distinctively a Palestinian product. Its stock in trade was Jewish
eschatology as developed in the long succession of writers of
'apocalypse' since Daniel (165 B.C.). Of the nature of this curious and
fantastic type of literature we have seen some examples in 2nd
Thessalonians and the Synoptic eschatology (Mark xiii.=Matt. xxiv.=Luke
xxi.). More can be learnt by comparing the contemporary Jewish writings
of this type known as 2nd Esdras and the Apocalypse of Baruch. Older
examples are found in the prophecies and visions purporting to come from
Enoch. For apocalypse became the successor of true prophecy in
proportion as the loss of Israel's separate national existence and the
enlargement of its horizon compelled it to make its messianic hopes
transcendental, and its notion of the Kingdom cosmic. Hence comes all
the phantasmagoria of allegorical monsters, spirits and demons, the
great conflict no longer against Assyria and Babylon, but a war of the
powers of light and darkness, heaven and hell. Yet all centres still
upon Jerusalem as the ultimate metropolis of the world, whose empires,
now given over to the leadership of Satan, will soon lie prostrate
beneath her feet.

Some such eschatology of divine judgment and reward is an almost
necessary complement to the legalistic type of religion. If Christianity
be conceived as a system of commandments imposed by supernatural
authority it must have as a motive for obedience a system of
supernatural rewards and punishments. Not merely, then, because for
centuries the legalism of the scribes had actually had its corresponding
development of apocalypse, with visions of the great judgment and Day of
Yahweh, but because of an inherent and necessary affinity between the
two, "Judæa" continued to be the home of 'prophecy' in New Testament
times also.

However, the one great example of this type of literature that has been
(somewhat reluctantly) permitted to retain a place in the New Testament
canon appears at first blush to be clearly and distinctively a product
of Ephesus. Of no book has early tradition so clear and definite a
pronouncement to make as of Revelation. Since the time of Paul the
Jewish ideas of resurrection provoked opposition in the Greek mind. The
Greek readily accepted immortality, but the crudity of Jewish
millenarianism, with its return of the dead from the grave for a
visible, concrete rule of Messiah in Palestine repelled him. The
representation of Acts xvii. 32 is fully borne out by the constant
effort of Paul in his Greek epistles to remove the stumbling-blocks of
this doctrine. It is no surprise, then, to find the 'prophecy' of
Revelation, and more particularly its doctrine of the thousand-year
reign of Messiah in Jerusalem, a subject of dispute at least since
Melito of Sardis (167), and probably since Papias (145). Fortunately
controversy brought out with unusual definiteness, and from the earliest
times, positive statements regarding the origin of the book. Irenæus
(186) declared it a work of the Apostle John given him in vision "in the
end of the reign of Domitian." The same date (93), may be deduced from
statements of Epiphanius regarding the history of the church in
Thyatira. Justin Martyr (153), as we have seen, vouches for the crucial
passage (Rev. xx. 2 f.) as from "one of ourselves, John, an apostle of
the Lord." Papias (145) vouched for its orthodoxy at least, if not its
authenticity. There can be no reasonable doubt that it came to be
accepted in Asia early in the second century, in spite of opposition, as
representing the authority of the Apostle John, and as having appeared
there c. 95. In fact, there is no book of the entire New Testament whose
external attestation can compare with that of Revelation, in nearness,
clearness, definiteness, and positiveness of statement. John is as
distinctively the father of 'prophecy' in second century tradition as
Matthew of 'Dominical Precepts' and Peter of 'Narratives.'

Moreover the book itself purports to be written from Patmos, an island
off the coast of Asia. It speaks in the name of "John" as of some very
high and exceptional authority, well known to all the seven important
churches addressed, the first of which is "Ephesus." By its references
to local names and conditions it even proves, in the judgment of all the
most eminent modern scholars, that it really did see the light for the
first time (at least for the first time in its present form) in Ephesus
not far from A.D. 95.

One would think the case for apostolic authenticity could hardly be
stronger. And yet no book of the New Testament has had such difficulty
as this, whether in ancient or modern times, to maintain its place in
the canon. It must also be said that no book gives stronger internal
evidence of having passed through at least two highly diverse stages in
process of development to its present form.

The theory of "another John" is indeed comparatively modern. Nobody
drammed of such a solution until Dionysius of Alexandria hesitatingly
advanced the conjecture in his controversy with Nepos the Chiliast. Even
then (_c._ 250) Dionysius (though he must have known the little work of
Papias) could think of no other John at Ephesus than the Apostle,
unless it were perhaps John Mark! It is Eusebius who joyfully helps him
out with the discovery in Papias of "John the Elder." But Eusebius
himself is candid enough to admit that Papias only quoted "traditions of
John" and "mentioned him frequently in his writings." When we read
Papias' own words, though they are cited by Eusebius for the express
purpose of proving the debatable point, it is obvious that they prove
nothing of the kind, but rather imply the contrary, viz. that John the
Elder, though a contemporary of Papias, was not accessible, but known to
him only at second hand, by report of travellers who "came his way." In
short, as we have seen, "Aristion and John the Elder" were the surviving
members of a group of 'apostles, elders and witnesses of the Lord' in
Jerusalem. If, then, one chose to attribute the 'prophecies' of Rev.
iv.-xxi. to this Elder there could be no serious objections on the score
of doctrine, for the "traditions of John" reported by Papias were not
lacking in millenarian colour. Only, it is not the 'prophecies' of Rev.
iv.-xxi. which contain the references to "John," but the enclosing
prologue and epilogue; and these concern themselves with the churches of
Asia as exclusively as the 'prophecies' with the quarrel of Jerusalem
with Rome.

The second century is, as we have seen, unanimous in excluding from
consideration any other John in Asia save the Apostle, and if the
writer of Rev. i. and xxii. produced this impression in all contemporary
minds without exception, including even such as opposed the book and its
doctrine, it is superlatively probable that such was his intention. The
deniers of the resurrection and judgment did not point out to Polycarp,
Papias, Justin, Melito and Caius, that they were confusing two Johns,
attributing the work of a mere Elder to the Apostle. They plumply
declared the attribution to John fictitious; and since the internal
evidence from the condition of the churches and growth of heresy in chh.
i.-iii. and the imperial succession down to Domitian in chh. xiii. and
xvii. strongly corroborate the date assigned in antiquity (_c._ 93), we
have no alternative, if we admit that the Apostle John had long before
been "killed by the Jews,"[25] but to suppose that this book, like
nearly all the books of 'prophecy,' is, indeed, pseudonymous. It does
not follow that he who assumes the name of "John" in prologue and
epilogue (i. 1 f., 4, 9; xxii. 8) to tell the reader definitely who
the prophet is, was guilty of intentional misrepresentation. If anything
can be made clear by criticism it is clear that the prophecies were not
his own. They were taken from some nameless source. The "pseudonymity"
consists simply in clothing a conjecture with the appearance of
indubitable fact.

    Footnote 25: See above, p. 104.

But why should a writer who wished to clothe with apostolic authority
the 'prophecies' he was promulgating, not assume boldly the title of
"apostle," as the author of 2nd Peter has done in adapting similarly the
Epistle of Jude? Why, if he assumes the name of the martyred Apostle
John at all, does he refrain from saying, "I John, an _apostle_, or
_disciple of the Lord_," and content himself with the humbler
designation and authority of 'prophet'?

This question brings us face to face with the most remarkable structural
phenomena of the book, and cannot be understandingly answered until we
have considered them.

The outstanding characteristic of Revelation is its adaptation of
literary material dealing with, and applicable to, one historical and
geographical situation, to another situation almost completely
different. The opening chapters, devoted to "John's" vision on Patmos
and the conditions and dangers of the seven Churches of Asia, employ
indeed some of the expressions of the substance of the book. The
promises of the Spirit to the churches recall the glories of the New
Jerusalem of the concluding vision of the seer. There is some reference
to local persecution at Smyrna incited by the Jews ("a synagogue of
Satan") and which is to last "ten days," and there is an isolated
reference to a martyrdom of days long gone by in the message to the
church in Pergamum (ii. 13) recalling remotely the blood and suffering
of which the body of the work is full. This we should of course expect
from an adapter of existing 'prophecies.' But the converse, _i. e._
consideration for the historical conditions of Ephesus and its sister
churches, on the part of the body of the work, is absolutely wanting. On
the one side is the situation of the Pauline churches on the east coast
of the Ægean in A.D. 93-95. The prologue and epilogue (Rev. i.-iii. and
xxii. 6-21) are concerned with these churches of Asia, and their
development in the faith, particularly their growth in good works,
purity from defilements of the world, and resistance to the inroads of
heretical teaching. The message of the Spirit, conveyed through "John,"
is meant to encourage the members of these churches to pure living in
the face of temptations to worldliness and impurity. The epistles to the
churches, in a word, belong in the same class with the Pastorals, Jude,
and 2nd Peter, as regards their object and the situation confronted;
though they are written to enclose apocalyptic visions which deal with a
totally different situation.

The visions, on the contrary, take not the smallest notice of
(proconsular) Asia and its problems. Their scene is Palestine, their
subject the outcome of Jerusalem's agonizing struggle against Rome. From
the moment the threshold of iv. 1 is crossed there is no consciousness
of the existence of such places as Ephesus, Smyrna and Thyatira. The
scenes are Palestinian. The great battle-field is Har-Magedon (_i. e._
city of Megiddo, on the plain of Esdraelon, the scene of Josiah's
overthrow, 2nd Kings xxiii. 29 f.). "The city," "the great city," "the
holy city" is Jerusalem; though "spiritually (in allegory) it is called
Sodom and Egypt" (_i. e._ a place from which the saints escape to avoid
its doom). When the saints flee from the oppression of the dragon it is
to "the wilderness." When the invading hordes rush in it is from beyond
"the Euphrates." When the redeemed appear in company with the Christ it
is on Mount Zion; they constitute an army of 144,000, twelve thousand
from each of the twelve tribes. Two antagonistic powers are opposed. On
the one side is Jerusalem and its temple, now given over to the Gentiles
to be trodden under foot forty and two months, on the other is Rome, no
longer, as with Paul, a beneficent and protecting power, but the city of
the beast, Babylon the great harlot, at whose impending judgment the
Gentiles will mourn, but all the servants of God rejoice. Jerusalem
rebuilt, glorified, the metropolis of the world, seat and residence of
God and his Christ, will take the place of Rome, the seat of the beast
and the false prophet. The gates of this New Jerusalem will stand open
to receive tribute from all the Gentile nations, and will have on them
the names of the twelve tribes of Israel. The foundations of the city
wall will have on them "the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb."

All this is cumulative proof that the horizon of the seer of Rev.
iv.-xx. is that of Palestine. Its expansion in the introductory Letters
of the Spirit to the Churches to include the seven churches of
(proconsular) Asia, is as limited in its way as the original. The later
writer merely adds the special province where he wishes the 'prophecy'
to circulate, with its special interests; there is no real interrelation
of the two parts.

It is a problem of great complexity to disentangle the various strands
of this strange and fantastic work, certain as it is that we have here a
conglomerate whose materials come from various periods. Some elements,
such as ch. xi. on the fate of Jerusalem, seem to date in part from
before 70; others, such as ch. xviii. on the fate of Rome, show that
while originally composed for the circumstances of the reign of
Vespasian or Titus, the time has been extended to take in at least the
beginning of that of Domitian.[26] The author rests mainly upon the
Hebrew apocalyptic prophets, such as Ezekiel, Daniel and Enoch, but he
has not been altogether inhospitable to such originally Gentile
mythology as the doctrine of the seven spirits of God, and the conflict
of Michael and his angels with the dragon. He intimates himself that his
prophesying had not been confined to one period or one people (x. 11).
When he translates the "Hebrew" name of the angel of the abyss,
"Abaddon," into its Greek equivalent (ix. 11), or uses Hebrew numerical
equivalents for the letters of the name of a man (xiii. 18), it is not
difficult to guess that this prophecy had at least its origin in
Palestine. In fact, there is no other country where the geographical
references hold true, and no other period save that shortly after the
overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus, that affords the historical situation
here presupposed, when worshipping "the beast and his image" is demanded
of the saints by the earthly ruler (Domitian), and the overthrow of the
seven-hilled city by one of its own rulers in league with lesser powers
is looked forward to as about to avenge the sufferings inflicted on the
Jews. As regards this hope of the overthrow of Rome, we know that the
legend of Nero's prospective return at the head of hosts of Parthian
enemies to recapture his empire gained currency in Asia Minor in
Domitian's reign, and this legend is certainly developed in Rev. xiii.
and xvii. On the other hand, the author, if he ever came to Asia, did
not cease to be a Palestinian Jew. He operates exclusively (after iv. 1)
with the materials and interests of Jewish and Jewish-Christian
apocalypse. He has no interest whatever in the churches of Asia. He does
not betray by one syllable a knowledge even of their existence, to say
nothing of their dangers, their heresies, their temptations. He does
make it abundantly clear that he is a Christian prophet (x. 7-11), and
(to us) almost equally clear that he is _not_ one of the twelve
apostles whose names he sees written on the foundation-stones of the New
Jerusalem (xxi. 14). But since his prophecy, with all its heterogeneous
elements had to do with the final triumph of Messiah, and the
establishment of His kingdom, after the overthrow of the power of
Satan--since it depicted "the time of the dead to be judged, and the
time to give their reward to thy servants the prophets, and to the
saints and to them that fear thy name," it could not fail to be welcomed
by orthodox Christians in (proconsular) Asia. For the churches of Asia
were engaged at this time in a vigorous struggle against the heretical
deniers of the resurrection and judgment. Only, a mere anonymous
prophecy from Palestine could not obtain any authoritative currency in
Asia. To be accepted, even among the orthodox, some name of apostolic
weight must be attached to it, as we see in the case of the two Epistles
of Peter and those of James and Jude. The Epistles of the Spirit to the
churches are, then, as truly "letters of commendation" as though they
introduced a living prophet and not merely a written prophecy. The John
whom they present is not called an apostle for the very simple reason
that the visions themselves everywhere refer to their recipient as a
'prophet.' The author of the prologue and epilogue does not disregard
the language of his material. As we have seen, he carefully weaves its
phraseology into the 'letters.' So with his insertion of the name
"John." It occurs nowhere but in i. 1 f., 4, 9 and xxii. 8 f. All
these passages, but especially xxii. 8 f., are based upon xix. 9_b_,
10, adding nothing to the representation but the name "John" and the
location "Patmos." In fact, xxii. 6-9 reproduces xix. 9 f., for the
most part verbatim, although it is clearly insupposable that the seer of
the former passage should represent himself as offering a _second_ time
to worship the angel, and as receiving _again_ exactly the same rebuke
he had received so shortly before. He who calls himself "John" in xxii.
8 is, therefore, _not_ the prophet of xix. 10. The epilogue itself has
apparently received successive supplements, and the prologue its prefix;
but he who inserts the name John has done so with caution. He may not
have intended to leave open the ambiguity found by Dionysius and
Eusebius between the Apostle and the Elder, as a refuge in case of
accusation, but he has at least been careful not to transgress the
limits of the text he reproduces. The seer spoke of himself as a
"_prophet_" writing from the midst of great _tribulation_, about the
_kingdom_ to follow to those that _endured_. He had said that he
received "true _words of God_" from an _angel_ who declared "I am a
fellow _servant_ with thee and with thy _brethren_ that hold _the
testimony of Jesus_" (_i. e._ the confession of martyrdom). The
prologue, accordingly, describes "John" as a _servant_ of Jesus, who
received from an _angel_ the _word of God_ and _the testimony of Jesus_
(i. 1 f.). He is a _brother_ and partaker in the _tribulation_ and
_kingdom_ and _endurance_ which are in Jesus. When he comes to Asia it
is "for the _word of God_ and _the testimony of Jesus_." The spot whence
he issues his prophetic message is not located in Ephesus, or in any
city where the residents could say, "But the Apostle John was never
among us." He resides temporarily (as a prisoner in the quarries?) in
the unfrequented island of Patmos. Thence he could be supposed to see
"in the Spirit" the condition of affairs in the churches of Asia without
inconvenient questions as to when, and how, and why.

    Footnote 26: Note the addition of an "eighth" emperor in ver. 11.

We may think, then, of this book of 'prophecy' as brought forth in the
vicinity of Ephesus near "the end of the reign of Domitian" (95). But
only the enclosing letters to the churches, and the epilogue
guaranteeing the contents, originate here at this time. The
'prophecies,' occupied as they are exclusively with the rivalry of
Jerusalem and Rome, and the judgment to be executed for the former upon
her ruthless adversary, bear unmistakable marks of their Palestinian
origin, not only in the historical and geographic situations
presupposed, but in the "defiant" Hebraisms of the language, and the
avowed translations from "the Hebrew." They are an importation from
Palestine like "the sound words, even the words of the Lord Jesus"
referred to in the Pastorals. The churches of Asia are feeling the need
of apostolic authority against the deniers of the resurrection and the
judgment, as much as against the perverters of the Lord's words. Such
centres as the homes of the prophesying daughters of Philip at Ephesus
and Hierapolis were even more abundantly competent to supply this demand
than the other. Agabus will not have been the only Judæan prophet who
visited them, especially after the "great tribulation" which befell
"those in Judæa." There is nothing foreign to the habit of the times,
even in Christian circles, if nameless 'prophecies' from such a source
are translated, edited, and given out under cover of commendatory
epistles written in the name of "John" at a time when John had indeed
partaken both of the tribulation and of the kingdom of Jesus. They would
hardly have obtained currency had they not been attributed to an
apostle; for a denial of the apostolicity of this book has always
deprived it of authority.

On the other hand, the actual (Palestinian) prophet has no such exalted
opinion of himself as of those whose names he sees written on the
foundation of the walls of the New Jerusalem (xxi. 14). He is not an
apostle and does not claim to be. He shows not the faintest trace of any
association with the earthly Jesus, and indeed displays a
vindictiveness toward the enemies of Israel that has more of the spirit
of the imprecatory psalms than the spirit of Jesus. He thinks of Jesus
as a king and judge bestowing heavenly rewards upon the martyrs in a
manner quite inconsistent with his rebuke of James and John (Mark x.
40). It is a far cry indeed from this to apostleship and personal
intimacy with Jesus.

The chief value of Revelation to the student of Christian origins is
that by means of its clearly determinable date (Ephesus, 93-95) he can
place himself at a point of vantage whence to look not only around him
at the conditions of the Pauline churches as depicted in the letters,
vexed with growing Gnostic heresy and moral laxity, but also both
backward and forward. The backward glance shows Palestine emerging from
the horrors of the Jewish war, filled with bitterness against Rome, held
down under hateful tyranny and longing for vengeance upon the despot
with his "names of blasphemy" and his demands of worship for "the image
of the beast" (emperor-worship). Here Jewish apocalyptic (as in 2nd
Esdras) and Christian 'prophecy' are closely in accord. Indeed a
considerable part of the material of Rev. iv.-xxi., especially in chh.
xi.-xii. is ultimately of Jewish rather than Christian origin. What the
development of Christian 'prophecy' was in Palestine from apostolic
times until the scattering of the church of "the apostles and elders"
after the war of Bar Cocheba (135), we can only infer from the kindred
Jewish apocalypses and the chiliastic "traditions of the Elders" quoted
by Irenæus from Papias. A forward look from our vantage point in Ephesus
_c._ A.D. 95, shows the effects of the Palestinian importation extending
down from generation to generation, first in the long chiliastic
controversy against the Doketic Gnostics, including Montanist
'prophecy'; secondly, in the growth of a claim to apostolic succession
from John.

(1) In the chiliastic controversy for a century the chief bones of
contention are the (non-Pauline) doctrine of the resurrection of the
_flesh_ (so the Apostles' Creed and the second-century fathers), and
that of a visible reign of Christ for a thousand years in Jerusalem. The
new form of resurrection-gospel which at about this time begins to take
the place of the apostolic of 1st Cor. xv. 3-11, centering upon the
emptiness of the sepulchre and the tangibility and food-consuming
functions of Jesus' resurrection body, instead of the "manifestations"
to the apostles, is characteristic of this struggle against the Greek
disposition to spiritualize. Luke and Ignatius represent the attitude of
the orthodox, Ignatius' opponents that of those who denied that Jesus
was "in the flesh after his resurrection." Revelation, like the
"traditions of the Elders," champions the visible kingdom of Messiah in
Jerusalem.

(2) In the effort for apostolic authority the writings which came
ultimately to represent Asian orthodoxy have all been brought under the
name and authority of the Apostle John, although for many decades after
the appearance of Revelation, Paul, and not John, remains the apostolic
authority to which appeal is made, and although the writings themselves
were originally anonymous. There was, indeed, a contributory cause for
the growth of this tradition in the accidental circumstance that a
Palestinian Elder from whom Papias derived indirect, and Polycarp in all
probability direct, traditions, bore also the name of John, and survived
until A.D. 117. Still, the main reason why this particular apostolic
name was ultimately placed over the Gospel and Epistles of Ephesian
Christendom, can only have been its previous adoption to cover the
compilation of Palestinian 'prophecies' of A.D. 95.




PART IV

THE LITERATURE OF THE THEOLOGIAN


CHAPTER IX

THE SPIRITUAL GOSPEL AND EPISTLES


Asia, as we have come to know it through a succession of writings dating
from Colossians-Ephesians (_c._ 62) down to Papias (145), had come to be
the chief scene of mutual reaction between 'apostolic' and Pauline
Christianity at the close of the first century. Here at Ephesus had been
the great headquarters of Paul's missionary activity. Here he had
reasoned daily in the school of one Tyrannus, a philosopher, and had
found "many adversaries." Here he had encountered the "strolling Jews,
exorcists," and had secured the destruction of an immense mass of books
of magic. Here, according to Acts, he predicted the inroads of heresy
after his "departure," and here the succeeding literature abundantly
witnesses the fulfilment of the prediction. Ephesians and Colossians
begin the series, the Pastoral Epistles (_c._ 90) continue it. Then
follow the 'letters to the churches' of Revelation (95) and the
Ignatian Epistles (110-117), not to mention those whose origin is
uncertain, such as Jude and 2nd Peter.

The Pastorals already make it apparent that even the Pauline churches
are not exempt from the inevitable tendency of the age to fall back upon
authority. The very sublimity of Paul's consciousness of apostolic
inspiration made it the harder for the next generation to assert any for
itself. Moreover heresy was growing apace. If even the outward pressure
of persecution tended to drive the churches together in brotherly
sympathy, still more indispensable would appear the need of traditional
standards to maintain the "type of sound doctrine," "the faith once for
all delivered to the saints." Without such it would be impossible to
check the individualism of errorists who took Paul's sense of personal
inspiration and mystical insight as their model, _without_ Paul's
sobriety of critical control under the standard of "the law of Christ."
It is no surprise, then, to find even at the headquarters of Paulinism
early in the second century a sweeping tendency to react toward the
'apostolic' standards. In particular, as Gnostic exaggeration of the
Pauline mysticism led continually further toward disregard of the
dictates of common morality, and a wider divergence from the Jewish
conceptions of the world to come, it was natural that men like Polycarp
and Papias should turn to the Matthæan and Petrine tradition of the
Lord's oracles, and to the Johannine 'prophecies' regarding the
resurrection and judgment.

Had nothing intervened between Gnostics and reactionaries the most vital
elements of Paul's gospel might well have disappeared, even at this
great headquarters of Paulinism. The Doketists, with their exaggerated
Hellenistic mysticism, were certainly not the true successors of Paul.
They showed an almost contemptuous disregard for the historic Jesus, a
one-sided aim at personal redemption, by mystic union of the individual
soul with the Christ-spirit, to the disregard of "the law of Christ,"
even in some cases of common morality. Paul was characterized by a
splendid loyalty to personal purity, to the social ideal of the Kingdom,
and to the unity of the brotherhood in the spirit of reciprocal service.
On the other hand men like the author of the Pastoral Epistles, Ignatius
and Polycarp, with their almost panic-stricken resort to the authority
of the past, were not perpetuating the true spirit of the great Apostle.
Their reliance was on ecclesiastical discipline, concrete and massive
miracle in the story of Jesus, particularly on the point of the
bodily--or, as they would have said, the "fleshly"--resurrection. Their
conception of his recorded "words," made of them a fixed, superhuman
standard and rule, a "new law." Teachers of this type, much as they
desired and believed themselves to be perpetuating the "sacred deposit"
of Paul, were in reality conserving its form and missing its spirit.
Such men would gladly "turn to the tradition handed down," of the
Matthæan Sayings, and the Petrine Story. But in the former they would
not find reflections of the sense of Son ship. They would find only a
supplementary Law, a new and higher set of rules. In the story they
would not discover the Pauline view of the pre-existent divine Wisdom
tabernacling in man, producing a second Adam, as elder brother of a new
race, the children and heirs of God. They would take the mysticism of
Paul and bring it down to the level of the man in the street. Jesus
would be to them either a completely superhuman man, approximating the
heathen demi-god, a divinity incognito; or else a man so endowed with
"the whole fountain of the Spirit" as to exercise perpetually and
uninterruptedly all its miraculous functions. The story of the cross
would be hidden behind the prodigies.

Least of all could the importation of apocalyptic prophecy do justice to
the Pauline doctrine of the 'last things.' True, Paul is himself a
'prophet,' thoroughly imbued with the fantastic Palestinian doctrines.
He, too, believes in a world-conflict, a triumph of the Messiah over
antichrist. More particularly in one of his very earliest epistles (2nd
Thessalonians) we get a glimpse into these Jewish peculiarities. But
these are always counterbalanced in Paul by a wider and soberer view,
which tends more and more to get the upper hand. His doctrine of
spiritual union with Christ, present apprehension of "the life that is
hid with Christ in God," a doctrine of Greek rather than Hebrew
parentage, prevails over the imagery of Jewish apocalypse. In the later
epistles he expects rather to "depart and be with Christ" than to be
"caught up into the air" with those that are alive and remain at the
'Coming.' So even if Paul did have occasion again and again to defend
his Jewish resurrection-doctrine against the Greek disposition to refine
it away into a mere doctrine of immortality, his remedy is not a mere
falling back into the crudities of Jewish millenarianism. Least of all
could he have sympathized with the nationalistic, and even vindictive
spirit of Rev. iv.-xxi., with its great battle of Jerusalem helped by
Messiah and the angels, against Rome helped by Satan and the Beast.
Paul's doctrine of the resurrection of the "body" by "clothing" of the
spirit with a "tabernacle" derived "from heaven," his hope of a
messianic Kingdom which is the triumph of humanity under a "second
Adam," has its apocalyptic traits. It is a victory over demonic enemies,
"spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places"; but it has the
reserve of an educated Pharisee against the cruder forms of Jewish
prophecy. It shows the mind of the cosmopolitan Roman citizen and
philosophic thinker, not merely that of the Jewish Zealot.

How salutary if Paul himself could have lived to control the divergent
elements among his churches, to check the subjective individualism of
the Gnostics on the one hand, and the reactionary tendencies of the
orthodox on the other. His parting words to his beloved Philippians are
sadly appreciative of how needful it was for their sake that he should
"abide in the flesh" (Phil. i. 24). Yet there was one thing still more
expedient--that he should abide with them in the spirit. And that is
just what we find evidenced in the great 'spiritual' Gospel and its
accompanying Epistles from Ephesus.

Debate still rages over a mere name, attached by tradition to these
writings that themselves bear no name. The titles prefixed by early
transcribers attribute them to "John." But they are never employed
before 175-180 in a way to even remotely suggest that they were then
regarded as written by John, or even as apostolic in any sense. And when
we trace the tradition back to its earliest form, in the Epilogue
attached to the Gospel (John xxi.) it seems to be no more than a dubious
attempt to identify that mysterious figure, the "disciple whom Jesus
loved." If, however, we postpone this question raised by the Epilogue,
the writings can at least be assigned to a definite locality (Ephesus)
and a fairly definite date (_c._ 105-110), with the general consent both
of ancient tradition and of modern criticism. This is for us the
important thing, since it enables us to understand their purpose and
bearing; whereas even those who contend that they were written by the
Apostle John can make little use of the alleged fact. For (1) the little
that is known of John from other sources is completely opposed to the
characteristics of these writings. They are characterized by a broad
universalism, and reproduce the mysticism of Paul. To attribute them to
the Pillar of Gal. ii. 9, or the Galilean fisherman of Mark i. 19 and
ix. 38, it becomes necessary to suppose that John after migrating to
Ephesus underwent a transformation so complete as to make him in reality
another man. (2) The meagre possibility that the basis of Revelation
might represent the Apostle John becomes more remote than ever. Now it
is a curious fact that critics who hold to the much-disputed tradition
that the Apostle John wrote the Gospel and Epistles, although these
writings make no such claim, and have no affinity with the known
character, show as a rule remarkable alacrity to dismiss the claims of
Revelation, which positively declares John to have been its author, and
has far stronger evidence, both internal and external, in support of the
claim, than have either the Gospel or the Epistles. We may prefer the
style and doctrine of the Gospel and Epistles, but this playing fast
and loose with the evidence can only discredit criticism of this type.
(3) The value of the demonstration of Johannine authorship would lie in
the fact that we should then have a first-hand witness to the actual
life and teaching of Jesus, immeasurably superior to the remote and
indirect tradition of the present Synoptic sources. But as a matter of
real fact those who maintain the Johannine authorship do not venture to
assert any such historical superiority. On the contrary they consider
the Synoptic tradition not only historically superior to "John," as
respects both sayings and course of events, but they are apt to
attribute to this Galilean apostle an extreme of Philonic abstraction,
so that he even prefers deliberate "fiction" to fact. Thus the reasoning
employed to defend the tradition destroys the only factor which could
give it value.

On the other hand it is possible to disregard these secondary disputes,
which aim only to increase or diminish the authority of the writings by
asserting or denying that they were written by the Apostle John, and to
approach the interpretation of them on the basis only of what is really
known, accredited both by ancient tradition and by modern criticism. On
this basis we can safely affirm that they originated in Ephesus early in
the second century, 'spiritualizing' what we have designated 'apostolic'
teaching, while at the same time strongly reacting against Doketic and
Antinomian heresy. By such a procedure we shall be employing modern
critical methods to the highest practical advantage in the interest of
genuinely historical interpretation.

Even those who find minute distinctions in style and point of view
between the Epistles and Gospel of John will admit that all four
documents emanate from the same period, situation, and circumstances,
and represent the same school of thought. We shall make no serious
mistake, then, if we treat them as written by the same individual, and
even as intended to accompany one another. We shall have the example of
so high an authority as Lightfoot, who considered 1st John an Epilogue
composed to accompany the Gospel in place of the present Epilogue (John
xxi.). Moreover the distinctions in the ancient treatment of 1st John
and the two smaller Epistles are all subsequent to the attribution of
the Gospel and First Epistle to the Apostle, and a consequence of it.
For 1st John and the Gospel had always been inseparable, and having no
name attached could easily be treated as the Apostle's. But 2nd and 3rd
John distinctly declare themselves written by an "Elder"; and in the
days when men still appreciated the distinction between an Elder and an
Apostle it was felt to be so serious a difficulty that 2nd and 3rd John
were put in the class of "disputed" writings. In reality 1st John and
the Gospel are just as certainly the work of an "Elder" as 2nd John and
3rd John, though no declaration to that effect is made. Moreover 1st
John and the Gospel may safely be treated as from the same author; for
such minute differences as exist in style and point of view can be fully
accounted for by the processes of revision the Gospel has demonstrably
undergone. This is more reasonable than to imagine two authors so
extraordinarily similar to one another and extraordinarily different
from everybody else.

"The Elder" does not give his name, and it is hopeless for us to try to
guess it, though it was of course well known to his "beloved" friend
"Gaius," to whom the third letter (the outside envelope) was addressed.
We have simply three epistles, one (3rd John) personal, to the aforesaid
Gaius, who is to serve as the writer's intermediary with "the church,"
because Diotrephes, its bishop, violently opposes him. Another (2nd
John) is addressed to a particular church ("the elect lady and her
children"), in all probability the church of Diotrephes and Gaius. It
may be the letter referred to in 3rd John 9. The third (1st John) is
entirely general, not even so much modified from the type of the homily
toward that of the epistle as Hebrews or James; for it has neither
superscription nor epistolary close. And yet it is, and speaks of itself
(i. 4; ii. 1, 7, 9, 12-14, etc.) as a literary product. It is not
impossible that this group of 'epistles,' one individual, one to a
particular church, one general, was composed after the plan of the
similar group addressed by Paul to churches of this same region,
Philemon, Colossians, and the more general epistle known to us as
Ephesians. They may have been intended to accompany and introduce the
Gospel written by the same author, just as the prophecies of Rev.
iv.-xxi. are introduced by the 'epistles' of Rev. i.-iii., or as
Luke-Acts is sent under enclosure to Theophilus for publication under
his patronage. At all events, be the connection with the Gospel closer
or more remote, to learn anything really reliable about the writer and
his purpose and environment we must begin with his own references to
them, first in the letter to Gaius, then in that to "the elect lady and
her children," then in his 'word of exhortation' to young and old, of
1st John. Thus we shall gain a historical approach finally to that
treatise on the manifestation of God in Christ which has won him the
title since antiquity of the 'theologian.'

Third John shows the author to be a man of eminence in the (larger?)
church whence he writes, old enough to speak of Gaius with commendation
as one of his "children," though Gaius himself is certainly no mere
youth, and eminent enough to call Diotrephes to answer for his
misconduct. He has sent out evangelistic workers, some of whom have
recently returned and borne witness "before the church" to their
hospitable reception by Gaius. For this he thanks Gaius, and urges him
to continue the good work. The main object of the letter, however, is
to commend Demetrius, who is doubtless the bearer of this letter as well
as another written "to the church" (2nd John?). This letter, the author
fears, will never reach its destination if Diotrephes has his way. There
is very little to indicate whence the opposition of Diotrephes arises,
but what little there is (ver. 11) points to those who make claims to
"seeing" God and being "of" Him, without adequate foundation in a life
of purity and beneficence. The letter "to the church" is more explicit.

Second John is perfectly definite in its purpose. After congratulating
the "elect lady" on those of her children (members) whom the writer has
found leading consistent Christian lives, he entreats the church to
remember the "new commandment" of Jesus, which yet is not new but the
foundation of all, the commandment of ministering love. The reason for
this urgency is that "many deceivers are gone forth into the world, even
they that confess not that Jesus Christ cometh in the flesh" (ver. 7).
And here we come upon a very novel and distinctive application of an
ancient datum of 'prophecy,' clearly differentiating this writer from
the author of Revelation. The Doketic heresy is explicitly identified
with "the deceiver and the antichrist." That must have been a new and
surprising turn for men accustomed to connect the antichrist idea with
the persecuting power of Rome. Satan, as we know, had been repeatedly
conceived as operating through the coercion of outward force brought
against the Messiah and his people through the Beast and the false
Prophet (Rev. xiii.). There was good authority, too, for a mystical "man
of sin" setting himself forth as God in the temple (2nd Thess. ii. 4),
or for connecting Daniel's "abomination that maketh desolate" with the
sufferings of the Jewish war and the later attempts of false prophets to
deceive the elect with lying wonders (2nd Thess. ii. 9; Mark xiii. 22;
Rev. xiii. 14). But this was a new application of the prophecy. To
declare that the heretical teachers were themselves antichrists was to
call the attention of the church back from outward opposition to inward
disloyalty as the greater peril. And the identification is not
enunciated in this general warning alone, but fully developed and
defended in two elaborate paragraphs of the 'word of exhortation' (1st
John ii. 18-29; iv. 1-6). When, therefore, we find Polycarp in his
letter (110-171) quietly adopting the idea, almost as an understood
thing, declaring "For every one who shall not confess that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, is antichrist" (vii. 1), it becomes almost a
certainty that he had read 1st John.[27]

    Footnote 27: Not 2nd John; for it is only in 1st John ii. 18 that
    the elder speaks of "many antichrists," identifying each separate
    Doketist with the apocalyptic figure. In 2nd John vii. it is the
    heresy itself as a phenomenon which constitutes _the_ antichrist.

Our elder's warning "to the church" (perhaps more particularly its
governing body) is to beware of these deceivers; not to receive them,
nor even to greet them, because they "go onward" (are 'progressives')
and do not "abide in the teaching of Christ." To abide in this
"teaching" is the church's only safeguard.

If next we turn to the more general epistle known as 1st John the lack
of any superscription is more than counterbalanced by the writer's full
and explicit declarations regarding motive and occasion. The epistle was
certainly intended to be read before entire congregations. Of part of it
at least the author himself says that it was "written concerning them
that would lead you astray" (ii. 26). Comparison of the full
denunciation with what we know of Doketism from its own writings, such
as the so-called _Acts of John_ (_c._ 175), shows very plainly what type
of heresy is meant. Moreover we have the Epistles of Ignatius, written
to these same churches but a few years later, and the detailed
descriptions of the Doketist Cerinthus and his doctrines given by
Irenæus, together with the explicit statement that the writings of John
were directed against this same Cerinthus.

Yet 1st John is far more than a mere polemic. The author writes to those
"that believe on the name of the Son of God, that they may know that
they have eternal life" (v. 13). This certainly is the result of the
conscious indwelling of the Spirit of Jesus. It is not evidenced,
however, by boastful words as to illumination, insight and knowledge,
but by practical obedience to the one new commandment; for "God is love,
and he that _loveth_ (not he that hath _gnosis_) is begotten of God and
knoweth God." This inward witness of the Spirit is a gift, or (to use
our author's term) an "anointing" (_i. e._ a 'Christ'-ening), whose
essence is as much beyond the Greek's ideal of wisdom, on the one side,
as it is beyond the Jew's ideal of miraculous powers on the other. It is
a spirit of ministering love corresponding to and emanating from the
nature of God himself. This is "the teaching of Christ" in which alone
it is safe to "abide."

But again as respects the historic tradition of the church our author is
not less emphatic. He values the record of an actual, real, and tangible
experience of this manifested life of God in man. The "progressives" may
repudiate the mere Jesus of "the flesh," in favour of one who comes by
water only (_i. e._ in the outpouring of the Spirit in baptism), and not
by the blood of the cross. For the doctrine of the cross was a special
stumbling-block to Doketists, who rejected the sacrament of the bread
and wine.[28] The actual sending of God's only-begotten Son into the
world, the real "propitiation" for our sins (so lightly denied by the
illuminati), is a vital point to the writer. The sins "of the whole
world" were atoned for in Jesus' blood actually shed on Calvary. The
church possesses, then, in this story a record of fact of infinite
significance to the world. The Doketists are playing fast and loose with
this record of the historic Jesus. They deny any value to the "flesh" in
which the æon Christ had merely tabernacled as its "receptacle" between
the period of the baptism and the ascension--an event which they date
_before_ the death on the cross.[29] They are met here with a peremptory
challenge and declaration. The experience of contact with the earthly
Jesus which the Church cherishes as its most inestimable treasure is the
assurance, and the only assurance that we have, of real fellowship with
the Father; for "the life, the eternal life" of God in man, the
Logos--to borrow frankly the Stoic expression--is known not by mere
mystical dreams, but by the historic record of those who personally knew
the real Jesus. The manifestation of God, in short, is objective and
historical, and not merely inward and self-conscious; and that outward
and objective manifestation may be summed up in what we of the Christian
brotherhood have seen and known of Jesus.

    Footnote 28: In the _Acts of John_ the Christ spirit which had been
    resident in Jesus comes to John after he has fled to a cave on the
    Mount of Olives from the posse that arrested the Lord. The sweet
    voice of the invisible Christ informs him there that the blinded
    multitude below had tortured a mere bodily shape which they took to
    be Christ, "while I stood by and laughed." In the _Gospel of Peter_
    Jesus hung upon the cross "as one who feels no pain" and was "taken
    up" before the end.

    Footnote 29: See note preceding.

It is when we approach the Fourth Gospel by way of its own author's
adaptation of his message to the conditions around him that we begin to
appreciate it historically, and in its true worth. The spirit of polemic
is still prominent in 1st John, but the Gospel shows the effect of
opposition only in the more careful statement of the evangelist's exact
meaning. It is a theological treatise, an interpretation of the doctrine
of the person of Christ, written that the readers "may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they may have
life in his name" (xx. 31). In an age so eagerly bent on ascertaining
the historic facts regarding Jesus' life, and the true sequence of
events (Luke i. 1-4), it is insupposable that an author so strenuous to
uphold the concrete reality of the church's historic tradition should
not give real history so far as he was able. He could not afford to
depreciate it in the face of Doketic myth and fancy and contempt for a
"Christ in the flesh." The idea that such a writer could deliberately
prefer fiction to fact is most improbable; ten times more so if he was
the only surviving representative of the twelve, a Galilean disciple
even more intimate than Peter with Jesus from the outset. But real
history was no longer attainable. The author of the Fourth Gospel
reports no event which he does not take in good faith to be fact. Yet it
must be apparent from his own statement of his purpose as well as from
the very structure of the book that he does not aim to be a historian,
but an interpreter of doctrine. He aims to give not _fact_ but _truth_.
And his handling of (supposed) fact has the freedom we should expect in
a church teacher of that age, and of the school of Paul the mystic. The
seven progressive "signs" that he narrates, culminating in the raising
of Lazarus, are avowedly (xx. 31) illustrative selections from a
multitude of current tales of miracle, aiming to produce that faith in
Jesus as the Son of God which will result in "life," _i. e._ the eternal
life which consists in his indwelling (1st John v. 20). They are not
described as acts of pity, drawn from one with whom the power of God was
found present to heal. Jesus does not yield as in the Synoptics when
compassion for trusting need overcomes reluctance to increase the
importunity that interfered with his higher mission. Their prime purpose
is to "manifest the glory" of the incarnate Logos, and Jesus performs
them only when, and as, he chooses. Pity and natural affection are
almost trampled upon that this "manifestation of his glory" may be made
more effective (ii. 4; iv. 48; ix. 3; xi. 4-6, 15). As in Paul, there is
no exorcism. This most typical and characteristic miracle of Petrine
story (Mark iii. 15; Acts x. 88) has disappeared. Or rather (as in Paul)
the casting out of Satan from his dominion over the entire world has
transcended and superseded it (John xii. 31-33; _cf._ Col. ii. 15). In
John, requests for miracle, whether in faith or unbelief, always incur
rebuke (ii. 4; iv. 48; vi. 30-36; vii. 4-7; xi. 3-15). Jesus offers and
works them when "his hour" comes, whether applied for or not (v. 6-9;
vi. 6; ix. 1-7). His reserve is not due to a limitation of almighty
power; for the power is declared explicitly to be his, _in his own
right_ (v. 21; xi. 22, 25, 42). He restrains it only that faith may rest
upon conviction of the truth rather than mere wonder (ii. 23-25; iii. 2
f.; iv. 39-42, 48; vi. 29-46; xiv. 11). He is, in short, an omniscient
(i. 47-50; ii. 25), omnipotent Being, temporarily sojourning on the
earth (iii. 13; xvi. 28).

The dialogue interwoven with these seven signs is closely related in
subject to them. It does not aim to repeat remembered Sayings, but
follows that literary form which since Plato had been the classic model
for presenting the themes of philosophy. The subject-matter is no
longer, as in the Synoptics, the Righteousness required by God, the
Nature and Coming of the Kingdom, Duty to God and Man. It is the person
and function of the speaker himself. Instead of the parables we have
allegories: "seven 'I am's'" of Jesus, in debate with "the Jews" about
the doctrine of his own person as Son of God.

This uniformity of topic corresponds with a complete absence of any
attempt to differentiate in style between utterances of Jesus, or the
Baptist, or the evangelist himself, in Gospel or Epistles. Had the
writer desired, it is certain that he could have collected sayings of
Jesus, and given them a form similar to those of Matthew and Luke. He
does not try. The only device he employs to suggest a distinction is an
oracular ambiguity at first misunderstood, and so requiring progressive
unfolding. The main theme is often introduced by a peculiar and solemn
"Verily, verily."

As with the 'signs' the lingering Synoptic sense of progress and
proportion has disappeared. At the very outset John the Baptist
proclaims to his followers that his own baptism has no value in itself.
It is not "for repentance unto remission of sins." It is _only_ to make
the Christ "manifest" (i. 19-34). Christ's atonement alone will take
away the sin (i. 29), Christ's baptism alone will convey real help (i.
34). Jesus, too, proclaims himself from the outset the Christ, in the
full Pauline sense of the word (i. 45-51; iv. 26, etc.). He chooses
Judas with the express purpose of the betrayal, and forces on the
reluctant agents of his fate (vi. 70 f.; xiii. 26 f.; xviii. 4-8;
xix. 8-11).

All this, and much more which we need not cite, makes hardly the
pretence of being history. It is frankly theology, or rather
apologetics. We have as a framework the general outline of Mark, a
Galilean and a Judæan ministry (chh. i.-xii.; xiii.-xx.), with traces of
a Perean journey (vii. 1 ff.). This scheme, however, is broken through
by another based on the Mosaic festal system, Jesus showing in each case
as he visits Jerusalem, the higher symbolism of the ceremonial (ii. 13
ff. Passover; v. 1 ff. Pentecost; vii. 1 ff. Tabernacles; x. 22
ff. Dedication; xii. 1 ff. Passover). There is in chh. i.-iv. a
'teaching of baptisms' and of endowment with the Spirit corresponding
roughly to Mark i. 1-45. There is in ch. v. a teaching of the authority
of Jesus against Moses and the Law, corresponding to Mark ii. 1--iii. 6.
There is a teaching of the 'breaking of bread' corresponding to Mark vi.
30--viii. 26 in John vi., though this last has been related not merely to
the brotherhood banquet ('love-feast') as in Mark, but anticipates and
takes the place of the teaching as to the Eucharist (_cf._ John vi.
52-59 with John xiii.). There is a Commission of the Twelve like Matt.
x. 16-42, though placed (with Luke xxii. 35-38) as a second sending on
the night of betrayal (xiii. 31--xviii. 26). There is dependence on
Petrine Story, and to some extent on Matthæan Sayings. In particular
John xii. 1-7 combines the data of Mark xiv. 3-9 with those of Luke vii.
36-50; x. 38-42 in a curious compound, making it certain that the
evangelist employed these two--and Matthew as well, if xii. 8 be
genuine (it is not found in the ancient Syriac). Yet our Synoptic
Gospels are not the only sources, and the material borrowed is handled
with sovereign superiority. In short, as even the church fathers
recognized, this Gospel is of a new type. It does aim to "supplement"
the others, as they recognized; but not as one narrative may piece out
and complete another. Rather as the unseen and spiritual supplements the
external and visible. This Gospel uses the established forms of
miracle-story and saying; but it transforms the one into symbol, the
other into dialogue and allegory. Then by use of this material
(supplemented from unknown, perhaps oral, sources) it constructs a
series of interpretations of the person and work of the God-man.

Of one peculiarly distinctive feature we have still to speak. Where the
reader has special need of an interpreter to attest and interpret a
specially vital fact, such as the scenes of the night of the betrayal,
or the reality of Jesus' propitiatory death (denied by the Doketists),
or the beginning of the resurrection faith, Peter's testimony is
supplemented and transcended by that of a hitherto unknown figure, who
anticipates all that Peter only slowly attains. This is the mysterious,
unnamed "disciple whom Jesus loved" (xiii. 23 ff.; xviii. 15 f.;
xix. 25-37; xx. 1-10; _cf._ Gal. xx. 20), a Paul present in the spirit,
to see things with the eye of spiritual insight. There is no
transfiguration-scene and no prayer of Gethsemane in this
Gospel--Transfiguration is needless where the glory shines uninterrupted
through the whole career. Prayer itself is impossible where oneness with
the God-head makes difference of thought or purpose inconceivable. Hence
the prayers of Jesus are often only "for the sake of those that stand
by" (xi. 41 f.). The same is true of the Voice from heaven at the
scene which takes the place of Transfiguration and Gethsemane in one
(xii. 27-33). Jesus will not ask for deliverance from that hour, because
he had sought it from the beginning. His prayer is "Father, glorify thy
name." The Voice, which some take to be an angel speaking to him (_cf._
Luke ix. 35; xxii. 43) is for the sake of the bystanders. The Voice at
his baptism likewise is not addressed to him (the incarnate Logos does
not need a revelation of his own identity) but to the Baptist.

So again and again Synoptic scenes are retouched and new scenes are
added in a way to present a consistent picture of the "tabernacling" of
the pre-existent Son of God in human flesh. As we review the whole, and
ask ourselves, What is the occasion of this strange new presentation of
the evangelic message? we begin to realize how indispensable is the key
which the evangelist has himself hung before the door. Many and complex
are the problems which confront us as we move through this heaped-up
tangle of anecdote, dialogue, and allegory. There is room for the
keenest scrutiny of criticism to determine, if possible, when, and how,
and from what sources these meditations were put together. But nothing
that critical insight, analysis, and comparison can furnish avails so
much to throw real light upon the work as what the evangelist himself
has done, by setting forth in a prologue (i. 1-18) the fundamental
principles of his conception.

In a word evangelic tradition as it had hitherto found currency still
lacked the fundamental thing in the Christology of Paul--the Incarnation
doctrine. Paul conceived the story of Jesus as a supernal drama,
beginning and ending in heaven at God's right hand. Even Matthew and
Luke, carrying back the adoption to Son ship from the baptism to the
birth of Jesus, had not essentially changed the pre-Pauline point of
view. Still there was no pre-existence. Jesus was not yet shown as the
Wisdom of God, through whom all things were created, the "heavenly man,"
the second Adam, taking upon him the form of a servant, humbling himself
and becoming obedient unto death, rich, and for our sakes becoming poor.
He was still, even in Mark, just the prophet mighty in deed and word,
raised up by God from among his brethren, and for his obedience exalted
to the messianic throne of glory. How _could_ this satisfy churches
trained in the doctrine of Paul? We should almost rather marvel that the
Synoptic narratives ever found lodgment at all, where Paul had preached
from the beginning a doctrine of the eternal Christ.

And the transformation is not one whit more radical than we ought to
anticipate. The Transfiguration story had been a halting attempt to
embody Pauline doctrine in Petrine story. But apart from the obvious
hold afforded to mere Doketism, how inadequate to Paul's conception of
the "Man from heaven"! The Fourth evangelist depicts the person of Jesus
consistently and throughout, despite his meagre and refractory material,
along the lines of Pauline Christology. There is no concession to
Doketism, for in spite of all, and designedly (iv. 6; xix. 28, 34),
Jesus is still no phantasm, but true man among men. There is no
hesitation to override, where needful, on vital points the great and
growing authority of 'apostolic' tradition. Tacitly, but
uncompromisingly, Petrine tradition is set aside. The "disciple whom
Jesus loved" sees the matter otherwise. In particular, apocalyptic
eschatology is firmly repressed in favour of a doctrine of eternal life
in the Spirit. The second Coming is not to be a manifestation "to the
world." It will be an inward indwelling of God and Christ in the heart
of the believer (xiv. 22 f.).[30] The place of future reward is not a
glorified Palestine and transfigured, rebuilt Jerusalem. The disciple,
like Paul, will "depart to be with Christ." The Father's house is wider
than the Holy Land. It has "many mansions," and the servant must be
content to know that his Master will receive him where he dwells himself
(xiv. 1-3; xvii. 24).

    Footnote 30: Some few passages inconsistent with this are found in
    the body of the Gospel. Like that of the appendix (xxi. 22) they are
    later modifications of a doctrine too Hellenic for the majority.

To realize what it meant to produce the 'spiritual' Gospel that comes to
us from Ephesus shortly after the close of the first century we must
place ourselves side by side with men who had learnt the gospel of Paul
_about_ Jesus, the drama of the eternal, pre-existent, "heavenly Man,"
incarnate, triumphant through the cross over the Prince of this world
and powers of darkness. We must